
--- Page 1 ---
ARYABHATIYA
OF
ARYABHATA
WITH THE COMMENTARY OF

BHASKARA I AND SOMESVARA

Critically edited

with Introduction and Appendices

By
KRIPA SHANKAR SHUKLA

Deptt. of Mathematics and Astronomy
University of Lucknow

 

INDIAN NATIONAL SCIENCE ACADEMY
NEW DELHI

--- Page 2 ---
Published for
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR THE

COMPILATION OF HISTORY OF SCIENCES IN INDIA
by

The Indian National Science Academy
Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi—1

©

Indian National Science Academy
197 6

 

EDITORIAL COMMITTEE

Chairman ; F. C. Auluck.

Secretary : B. V. Subbarayappa

Member : R.S. Sharma

Editors ; K.S. Shukla and K. V. Sarma

Printed in India
At the Vishveshvaranand Vedic Research Institute Press
Sadhu Ashram, Hoshiarpur (Pb.)

--- Page 3 ---
FOREWORD

Aryabhata (b.476 A.D.) occupies a prestigious
position in the history of Indian astronomy and mathe-
matics. In view of his important contributions, particularly
to astronomy, he has been rightly regarded as the founder
of scientific astronomy in India. His works, namely, the
Aryabhatiya, which is available in its original form, and the
Aryabhata-siddhanta which was epitomised by Brahmagupta
in his Khanda-khad yaka, were hailed as works par excellence.
The 1500th birth anniversary of the great astronomer and
mathematician is being celebrated from November 2-4, 1976
under the auspices of the National Commission for the
Compilation of History of Sciences in India set up by the
Indian National Science Academy. The Academy is grate-
ful to the esteemed Prime Minister of India, Shrimati Indira
Gandhi, fot _ a. iy agreeing to inaugurate the celebration
on November 2, 1976.

In commemoration of this occasion, the Indian
National Science Academy is releasing the critical edition of
the Aryabhatiya in three parts :

Part I : Text with English translation, notes and com-
ments, along with introduction and appendices.

Part II: Text with the commentary of Bhaskara I and
Somegvara, along with introduction and
appendices.

Part III : Text with the commentary of Suryadeva Yaj-
van, along with introduction and appendices.

Itis hoped that these volumes will serve as books of
reference to scholars interested in the field. On behalf of
the Indian National Science Academy, I offer my sincere
thanks to Drs. K. S. Shukla and K.V. Sarma for their

scholarly and painstaking work in preparing these volumes
for the Academy. pespanns

B. P. PAL
President
Indian National Science Academy

New Delhi,
15-10-1976

--- Page 4 ---
CHS om 16d) CT Mitiny Uo “MOD : QzZE OTOL

  

Cy sup ‘og dy €] pirtings wo “word 2 Gog O|od

 

 

 

 

(adyios wiepeeyey jeawyed) C9081 ‘ON ‘UinipueALy “qsuy ‘soy “JO “AU B[eIIy : V SIN
I vuviasyHa dO ‘WOD HHI HLM VWAILVHAVAUY

--- Page 5 ---
CONTENTS

FOREWORD

INTRODUCTION

Introductory

1. Bhaskara I

1.

A Saivite Hindu

2. Bhaskara’s date

1.
2. Bhaskara I not a direct pupil of Aryabhata I

Datta’s conjecture

3. Bhiskara’s place

1.
2.

Asmaka
Valabhi

4. Bbaskara’s works

1.

2
3
4.
5

Known works

No other work
Chronological order
Importance

Appreciation

5. Maha-Bhaskariya

1.

2
3
4.
5

Contents
Arrangement of contents

Language, metres and technical terms
Special features

Popularity

6. Laghu.Bhaskariya

1.

2.

2
we

A. Bhi

Contents
Notable features
Popularity

Page

xvii
xvii
xViii
XVili |
xix
XX
xxii
XXV

XXV

XXIX

XXX
XXX
Xxxii
XXXiil
XXXI1f
XXXIV
XXXV
XXXVi
XXXVili
xl

xlii
xlv
xlvi
xlvi
xlvii

Xivili

--- Page 6 ---
ii

ARYABHATIYA

7. Aryabhatiya-Bhasya

1.

2. Scope

Nature

3. Language and style

4. References :

S.

1.

Mathematicians Maskari, Purana, Mudgala
and Pitana

Passages from mathematical works

Astronomers and astronomica! works :

The Five Siddhantas

Latadeva

Prabhikara

Simharaja

Garga and Sphujidhvaja Yavanesvara
Passages from astronomical works
References to non-mathematical works and
writers
Geographical references :

Countries and States

Towns and Places

Notable features
1. Use of numbers and symbolism
2. Classification of mathematics —
3. The four Bijas of Ganita and their nomen-
clature
4. Symbolic algebra earlier to Bhaskara I
3. Use of unusual or special terms tee
6. Weights and measures
7. Classification of the Puiveriser (Kuttakara)
8. Examples illustrating Aryabhata I’s rules
9. Tables for the equation ax—l=by
10. Multiple-worded number-chronograms

Page
xlviii
xix

1

l

liti
Iv

li

li
Ixi
Ixiv
Ixvi
Ixvii

Ixvili

Ixix
Ixix
Ixix
xx
Ixxi
Ixxi
Ixxiii

Ixxvi
Ixxvii
Ixxviii
Ixxx
Ixxxi
1xxxii
Ixxxii

Ixxxii

--- Page 7 ---
CONTENTS

g. Scholiasts of Bhaskara I

8.1.

Commentaries on the Maha-Bhaskariya

Govinda-svami’s commentary

SUryadeva’s commentary

The Prayoga-racana

Makkibhatta’s commentary bes
Paramesvara’s Siddhanta-dipika

DAupawn

Paramesvara’s Karma-dipika

8.2. Commentaries on the Laghu-Bhaskariya

Sankaranarayana’s commentary
Udayadivakara’s commentary, Sundari
Paramesvara’s commentary
Commentary Vivarana in Old Malayalam
Anonymous commentary in Malayalam

Balasankaram by Sankaran Nampitiri

raw PF YD

Another anonymous commentary in Malayalam...

9. Somesvara

10. Present edition of Bhaskara I’s commentary

1.

Manuscripts used

2. Editorial Note :

3.

i. Manuscript material
ii. Presentation of the Text and Commentary
iii. Editorial innovations

iv. Appendices

Acknowledgements

eee

iti
Page

Ixxxiv

Ixxxv

Ixxxv
xc
xe

XCil
xciii

XCV

xcvil
xcevil
cli
civ
cv
evii
cvii

cviil

cix

cxi
cxi
exiii
cxiii
CXV
cxv

CXxvi

cxvi

--- Page 8 ---
iv ARYABHATIYA

ARYABHATIYA WITH THE BHASYA OF BHASKARA

aiyferarata:
(GITIKA SECTION)
aR_arawmA (Invocation) te
aearfaata afvarat (Method of writing numbers)

valfararesstgHte sarearareaay (Views of the commentator
on the origin of astronomy) ves

Fay saifaamieastareag (Superiority of astronomy among
the ancillaries of the Veda)

eeeragt wlfactedtaaat ( Use of astronomy in
everyday life)

verat guatat: (Revolution-numbers of Planets in a yuga)

oerragraaT: (Rev. numbers of the Moon’s Apogee and
of Sighroceas of Planets) ™

wagTagm: (Rev, number of the Moon’s Ascending node) **"
sirorzenatenfefazm: (Zero point of planetary motion)

wend agrawaty a (Measure of the kalpa ‘and amount
elapsed)

aveint seatsaroif (Measures of the orbits of planets)

q-afit-wgrnt sara: (Diameters of the Earth, Moon
and the planets) a

awaiaea: agfaetara (Obliquity of ecliptic and Inclinations
of the planetary orbits)

waleaatacaritfa (Positions of Ascending nodes and
Apogees)

staraal: weaviterafzaa: (Manda and Sighra epicycles in odd
quadrants) .

graqaa): araeitsraftaa: (Manda and Sighra epicycles in even
quadrants)

Page

14

4%
4s

4
RR

RR

ae
RR

Qo

4

RR

qe

Ra

--- Page 9 ---
CONTENTS

eafanfersatatfz (The 24 Rsines)

aaitfaaigqa afar say (Advantage of the study of the

Ten Gitika-sutras)

aforaare:
(MATHEMATICS SECTLON)
ARTIC (Invocation)
steerer inee: ( (Enunciation of the topics discussed)

@ (Places of notation)

 
  
 

( (Square and Squaring)

* gaeefewsi (Cube and Cubing)

aaa (Square root)

wid { (Cube root)

1 (Area of a Triangle)
qaiernery (Volume of a Right pyramid)
Ghdaway ( (Area of a Circle)

; aaawey (Volume of a Sphere)
saeraaqiacay (Area of a Trapezium)

Reed stants (Area of any Plane figure and veri-
fication thereof)

 

  
 
  

 

aareteiaeasat (Chord of one-sixth of a circle)
aa saraafefuaeaea: (Circumference-Diameter ratio)

Baafafeat sassawaa (Geometrical derivation of the
Rsine table)

aTeITAtT Bossa (Rsine-differences by alternative method) **’

qutfefafg: (Construction of the Circle etc.)
eaqufacareniq (Radius of the Shadow-sphere)

agiazreerfaaaay (Gnomon— Its size and shape)

Page
eq

eq

BR
BR
ER
ve
Yo
AR
43
uv
Xs
go
4
RR

&&
94

94

9

aR
Gy
ay

ay

--- Page 10 ---
vi ARYABHATIYA

meqsainfaraay (Length of the gnomon)

satqegrared (Gnomonic shadow due to a lamp-post)

MSRVHAEI Sates aTTy (Measure of lamp-post
and distances of shadow-tips, from two gnomonic

shadows)

qaatfenntat ara: (Relation between base, upright and

hypotenuse)
ausdsaracal: ara: (Half-chord—Arrow relation)

qurangereatay (Arrows of intercepted arcs of intersecting

circles)
aigtafinay (Sum of a series in A.P.)
megarty (No. of terms in a series in A.P.)

fafauaaay (Sum of the series ¥=N)

aifafaga: wafafarra (Sum of the series ZN? and =N*)

THM ufrerderiaay (Product of two numbers by

an alternative method)

grea-graAcrarty (Calculation of multiplicand and multi-

plier from their product and difference)
WaeaAaR (Principal and Interest)
azrfeq (Rule of three)
aSaziftwT (Rule of five)
aeaifirey (Rule of seven)
saeaatifteR (Inverse rule of three)
watTaaiAy (Simplification of fractions)

faqdtasd (Method of inversion)

wanaadaeafare: (A special variety of simultaneous

equations involving several unknowns)

geatamtacyy (Simple equation)

Page

eo

go

ce

a
xe

qoR
qoX
qor

198

Ve

AAR

a3
qe
14%
198
924
RR
qRR
aR

qRX
qr

--- Page 11 ---
CONTENTS

marerastrat (Time of meeting of two moving bodies)
RESTS: (Pulveriser or Linear indeterminate equation)
fatapgrare: (Non-residual Pulveriser)

TEGFITTT, nogaafafa: (Planetary pulveriser : Method
applicable when the residue of revolutions is

given)
qusaneaeafafiz: (Method applicable when part of the
revolution to be completed is given) .

wiferggietz: (Pulveriser with residue of signs)
gererater ataafafa: (Alternative method)

wrmegratz: (Pulveriser with residue of degrees)
facaragrere. (Pulveriser with residue of minutes)
arvegrert: (Weekday Pulveriser)

mERETET fara: (Another type of Planetary Pulveriser)
arzgzrert fata: (Another type of Weekday Pulveriser)
wedtta E_TETe: (Pulveriser involving sum of planets)
waT-GzrHIe: (Pulveriser with two remainders)

Fei-gg_are: (Time Pulveriser)

waratratey RzrRIT: (Pulveriser with non-abraded re-

mainder)

wuwggretefate: (Another type of Pulveriser with two
remainders)

wearfacit FUTFT HIT: (Pulveriser with two remainders from
orbital method)

wearftal cauggrert: (Pulveriser with three remainders
from orbital method)

qHTeata Re HiTarset (Multipliers and Quotients relating

to constant pulverisers)

vii
Page
ARS
FRR
Wak

Re

135
Vas
938

4¥o
V4
TSR
783
VR
qe
qed

V9

aes

Xo

q44

qe

VRS

--- Page 12 ---
viii ARYABHATIYA

qaeq (For the Sun)

arzea (For the Moon)

aezisaea (For the Moon’s apogee)

aizqtaea (For the Moon’s ascending node)

wtweq (For Mars) nee
guxitsiteaes (For Mercury’s Sighrocca)

Jet: (For Jupiter)

yaailalsaea (For Venus’ Sighrocca)

ga: (For Saturn)

aegaezea (For Moon’s anomaly)

ufafeaaey (For intercalary days)

wanfeaaea (For Omitted days) see
qataaed (For Sun’s declination)

afyataer (For Intercalary months)

reat HUTIT a:

(SECTION ON RECKONING OF TIME)

AFaAtawrg (Invocation)

wrafanrt: aafaataa (Time-divisions and circular divisions) **

faataafeatta (Conjunctions of Planets)

git eacaiacieat (Vyalipatas in a Yuga)

gi agteadtaanat: (Anomalistic and Synodic revolutions of
planets in a Yuga)

awaaHTat Pasa: (Jovian years, Asvayuj etc.)

alaraaaqaaarna (Solar, Lunar, Civil and Sidereal
measures of time) .

afanraranfaatia (Intercalary months and Omitted days)

argafagzaadaarmfa (Year measures of Men, Manes and
Gods) ed

Page
qA%
qh
Vhs
qRo
954
VaR
148
Wak

~ Few

9145
VRS
{vo
qo

qo

VR
9X
Fok
qos

198

q50

VF4
484

A8&

--- Page 13 ---
CONTENTS

qaari agfaaaard @ (Measure of the yuga and length of
. the day of Brahma) :

geafaenrfagnfrart: (Division of Yuga into Utsarpfni etc.) °°
ariwzarasta: (Date of Aryabhata’s birth)

aafastaracafaamt: (Endlessness of time and starting point
" of Yuga, month, etc.) we

wert aatiacay (Equality of the linear motion of planets) -**~

wernt aanfacta Bearerteat (Order of planetary orbits due
to the equality of their linear motion)

farrwenra weatsiatreimgeay (Difference in the linear
measure of the signs etc. in different orbits) .

wgeearafeaiana: (Relative positions of the planetary
orbits) oe

_ Mregrufaatfaafatm (Knowledge of the Lords of the

hour etc.) aa
“ sferreaerferfirat ugafafrecoy (Motion of planets by eccentric
' circles) aad
Sfarerafaarty (Set-up of the eccentric circle) “
reteaeafafrar werfasfaaraaq (Planetary motion explained
through epicycles) _
Wieaqaafet — ganth: (Planetary motion along the
epicycles) “
AMeaq MOTT RATA (Motion of the Manda and Sighra
epicycles) ees
freeze fafirar UgeKetecorsfeat (Planetary computation
through eccentric circles) vse
VHT AG Ramagity (Others’ views on planetary
computation) tee
wreitearefafira afqeguendacoy (Computation of Saturn,
Jupiter and Mars through epicycles) “

A. Bh, 2

Page

qs
as
RF

Rod
qo

R19

Raa
R42
qe

RU
RW

248
Ro
RR
RRR
RRE

Ras

--- Page 14 ---
x ARYABHATIYA

THAT afTyVR TeHEtHTA (Alternative method for the
above)

eos >

qarziggratay (Distance between the Earth and the
planets) ”

wTqIa: eEtHTTA (Computation of Venus and Mercury) ***

mUIgITt eREMsAamfqaaq (Computation of the distance in
yojana-s of the planets)

ageqetatmt fata: (Specialities in planetary computation) °**

fafasfarsgacftarag (Computation of the beginning or
end of the tithi) “

qaiaaaat: anfaaitscrg (Calculation of the Sun and
Moon at conjunction or opposition) “ee

aaraeamareyeteamry (Computation of the beginning
or end of the Moon’s naksatra) .-

TATE:
(SECTION ON THE CELESTIAL SPHERE)
a_aracay (Invocation)
mMaaeaq: (Armillary sphere)
Wilt ATHIAVSAA (Ecliptic on the Sphere of asterisms) ‘**

aaeanveratter: (Celestial bodies moving along

the ecliptic) one
faetanvesatitt: (Celestial bodies moving along planetary
orbits) ns
vant stint: (Degrees of time for visibility of the
planets) noe
wugratat satmga: (Reason for the brightness of the Earth
and of the planets) te
wened faerart: (Lighted part of the Moon) oe

Page

RRR
Qe

RR

RV
Raq

RR

RRs

RRs

Qo
Rvo

Rva

ave

Rey

2¥e

Rko
Raq

--- Page 15 ---
CONTENTS

warrgiafa: (Elevation of the lunar horns)
aezeq astaeta: (Time of visibility of the Moon)

qexea areatazsaet: (Meridian transit of the Moon)

eapyyatarterarfafi: (Method of drawing a diagram
of the elevation of the lunar horns) we

qeqeet faard oagiafaasiay (Observation of the elevation
of the lunar horns from inside a room)

waffat az sag rafaaedat (Elevation of the horns of the
half-risen Moon) vee

Sewer frarfaadq: (Reason for the dark and light portions
in the Moon) nee

 

 

geiteriearry (Situation of the Earth) we
[ Somegvara’s commentary begins ]

x gpiteages snforat feafa: (Situation cf living beings on the

 

 
 

 

‘ surface of the Earth) 7“
~ eh wauradt (Increase and decrease of the size of the
" Earth) 7
« Nereror (Earth’s rotation) ™
"apeeeetsrenty (Cause of the rotation of the Earth) “
Rewer (Description of Mt. Meru) 7
Weasargadt: feat (Situation of Meru and Badavamukha)***
searfrenaem (Order of the rising of the Sun) -
aatares-aTayY’ (Two cities on the prime meridian) -
witteq grargeaatit (Visible and invisible portions of the
Bhagola) .

Ae-ararqaeanai Ba Ty (Motion of the Bhagola
as scen from Meru and Badavamukha)

targeagremt feasatry (Measure of the day of the Gods,
Demons, Manes and Men) v7

wale fafawaesag (Horizon in the Khagola) ™

Page
RXV
RRR
Rae

RY

RXR

RNR

aXe
R45

RUS

RUE
Rho
Ro
244
BaR
RRR
Rea

aR

ex

REX
AER

--- Page 16 ---
xii ARYABAATIYA

geaegerq (Equatorial horizon) tee
ameiterar gez: feafa: (Position of the observer in relation
to the Khagola) o

FEN TAIT A (Vertical circle and the vertical circle
through the central ecliptic point)

eqaag-taaagq (Automatic Sphere) os
waaay (The Latitude triangle) vs
eargterateifasacw: (Radius of the day-circle)

Faratat eye: (Right ascensions of Aries etc.)

farfasat (Earth-sine) vt

eaaeitzar: (Times of Rising of the signs at the local
place) ve

gteatamem: (Rsine of altitude at the desired time) ws

meraqq (Projection of Planet’s distance from its rising-
setting line on the plane of the horizon)

wstat (Amplitude of the rising Sun)
wWaTEg: (Rsine altitude of the Sun at the prime vertical) °°"
AeatAIeE: (Rsine altitude at midday)

eaaiasat (Rsine of the zenith distance of the central
ecliptic point) ne
qmfasat (Rsine of the arc of the ecliptic between the Sun

and the central ecliptic point)

weagree ( Visibility correction due to the latitrde
of the observer)

waageeH (Visibility correction due to the ayana of the
planet) a

watlacaed werrertet @ (Nature of the Moon etc. and
cause of eclipses) see

wErAeTETa: (Time of middle of the eclipse) ““

Page
REE

Rue

Re
Ras
Ras
RRs
RES

Rive

Reo

R94

BWR
BWR
ROR
Wwe

Rov

qu¥

RUG

RUE

Rv

Qe

--- Page 17 ---
CONTENTS
qaqraraeae (Length of the Earth’s shadow) vee
anat faserwa (Diameter of Earth’s Shadow at the Moon’s

distance)
ferantaaag (Calculation of half-duration of eclipse)
fawratataaaa (Calculation of half-duration of totality)

wren averataq (Measure of the uneclipsed part of

the Moon)
geemfersara: (Eclipsed portion at the desired time) se
‘weaeaaq oagaatt a (Deflection due to latitude
and that due to declination) oo

‘argrfaraen avi: (Colour of the orb during an eclipse) oe
_wartet tfzagry (Sun’s eclipse not to be predicted)
mgeresitora: (Method for determining planetary motions) **°
“SesrtadenzTy (Mention of the School)

  
 

:Sfeerqemfey eefteraq (Punishment to the imitator)

MReerceaer srigreeite: (Concluding verse of Somed-

vara’s commentary) oe

WrewtaTeTeT SIgitetH: (Concluding verse of Bhaskara’s
commentary) ree

APPENDICES

I. Examples in the Aryabhatiya-Bhasya of Bhaskara *"*
Il. Bhaskara’s Tables for the Constant Pulveriser
ax—]= by eee

Nil. Bhaskara’s Terms for Mathematical operations

IV. Authorities cited by Bhaskara in the Aryabhatiya-

Bhasya tas

xiii
Page

Rec

Rec
BR
We

Rao

RR0

Quo
ABR
Bay
a
Rak

Ia

Iau

289

335

340

345

--- Page 18 ---
ziv ARYABHATIYA

V. Quotations in the Aryabhatiya-Bhasya

VI. Geographical references made by Bhdskara in the
Aryabhatiya-Bhasya ’

Vil, Word-numerals used by Bhaskara

VII. Index-Glossary of Technical Terms used in the
Aryabhatiya-Bhasya bes

IX. Index of half-verses and key passages

Page
347

350
351

353
375

--- Page 19 ---
ROMAN TRANSLITERATION OF DEVANAGARI

Short :

Long :

Anusvara :

Classified :

Un-classified :

Compound :

A

qo

a

tr

cate
mes

av

VOWELS
3% F
i ro]
$aywmt z
i@e oo ai
= m
h
CONSONANTS
q T q
kh g gh
5 FF q
ch j jh
3 = g
th d dh
q 4 a
th d dh
® q q
ph b bh
~ 3 4
r I Vv
a FI

at

au

Ap jy 8B of mo of Of

wn. sad

--- Page 20 ---
A

BBi
BrJa
BrSam
BrSpSi
GCN
GSS
GK
GT
IHQ
IIHS

LMa
MBh
PG
PSi
SiDVr
SiSe
SiSt
Sasi

Tris

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

Aryabhatiya of Aryabhata I

\

Bhaskara II’s Bijaganita of Varahamihira
Brhat-jataka of Varahamihira

Brhat-saimnhita of Varahamihira
Brahma-s phuta-siddhanta of Brahmagupta
Graha-cara-nibandhana of Haridatta
Ganita-sara-sangraha of Mahavira
Ganita-Kaumudi of Narayana
Ganita-tilaka of Sripati

Indian Historical Quarterly

Indian Journal of History of Science
Lilavati of Bhaskara II
Laghu-Bhaskariya of Bhaskara I
Laghu-manasa of Maiijula (Mufijala)
Maha-Bhaskariya of Bhaskara I
Patiganita of Sridhara
Patica-siddhantika of Varahamihira
Sisya-dhi-vyddhida of Lalla
Siddhanta-sekhara of Sripati
Siddhanta-Siromani of Bhaskara I
Sarya-siddhanta

Trisatika of Sridhara

xvi

--- Page 21 ---
INTRODUCTION

The present volume, which forms Part II of our edition of the
Aryabhatiya, contains the Sanskrit text of the Aryabhatiya along with
its commentary in Sanskrit by Bhaskara who was considered to be
the greatest authority on Aryabhata I and who, in the words of
his scholiast Govinda of the ninth century A.D., “‘stimulated and
glorified the teachings of Aryabhata I”.

This Bhaskara is a different person from his namesake of the
twelfth century A.D., the celebrated author of the Lilavati and the
Siddhanta-Siromani. He lived in the seventh century of the Christian era
and was a contemporary of Brahmagupta (A.D. 628). To distinguish
between the two, we designate the commentator of the Aryabhatiya
as Bhaskara I and the author of the Li/avati as Bhaskara Il.

Although Bhaskara I earned great namz and fame as a teacher
- (guru) of astronomy and his works continued to be studied in South
‘ India up to the end of the sixteenth century A. D., and his writings
.@xisted even afterwards in the form of manuscripts in the Oriental
_ Manuscripts Libraries and private collections, he was quite forgotten
and was totally unknown to historians of mathematics and astronomy
hike Sankara Balakrsna Diksita and Sudhakara Dvivedi. It was in
A.D. 1930 that Dr Bibhutibhushan Datta discovered his works and
invited the attention of scholars to them ina paper entitled ‘The two
Bhaskaras’ published in Indian Historical Quarterly.

The two original works of Bhaskara I, viz.,the Maha-Bhis-
kariya and the Laghu-Bhaskariya, have already been edited and published
with commentaries in Sanskrit written by Govinda-svami and Parame-
§vara (A.D. 1431), and English translations of both the works have also
appeared along with detailed annotations and comments. Bhaskara I
is thus no longer unknown to historians of science. His commentary
on the Aryabhatiya, which may be described as an important historical
document throwing light on mathematics and astronomy in the sixth
and seventh centuries A.D. in India, has not been published so far and
18 seeing the light of day, now, for the first time.

a

 

1. Vol. VI, 1930, pp. 727-36.
A. Bh. 3

xvii

--- Page 22 ---
viii INTRODUCTION
1. BHASKARA I

Hindu writers generally do not give the details of their ancestors
and personal history. The position as regards Hindu astronomers
and mathematicians is not much better. Works on astronomy written
before the sixth century A.D. have been declared by the later writers
to have been of divine origin, containing knowledge imparted by one
god or the other to his devotee. The Surya-siddhanta, for example,
claims to contain the teachings imparted to the asura Maya by an
agent of the Sun-god. The Aryabhatiya of Aryabhata I is the earliest
work on mathematics and astronomy which bears the natne of an
individual. But AryabhataI, too, does not throw much light on
himself. Inthe Aryabhatiya, he simply mentions his name and the
year of his birth. Later writers have followed his example and have
mentioned their names and sometimes also given one or two facts
regarding their time or place. It is Bhdskara II of the twelfth century
who has given a more detailed information about his life, and some of
the subsequent writers have followed him.

Bhaskara I, an ardent follower of Aryabhatal ashe is, has
followed Aryabhata I in keeping the details of his personal and family
history a close secret. Like Aryabhata I, he has mentioned his name in
all his works and in his commentary on the Aryabhatiya he has given, in
addition, the number of years elapsed since the beginning of the current
Kalpa (acon), but nowhere in his writings has he mentioned the name
of his father, mother or teacher or of the place where he was born,
brought up or educated, or of the place where he settled in later life
and wrote his works. In deciding his time and place we have to depend
solely on the circumstantial evidence supplied in the works written
by him.

11. A Saivite Hindu

Numerous references from the Vedic literature in his commentary
on the first chapter of the Aryabhatiya and repeated obeisance to God
Siva in the opening stanzas of his works suggest that Bhaskara I
was a Hindu, probably a Brahmana, and a worshipper of God Siva,
In one of the opening stanzas of the Maha-Bhaskariya, he writes :

“I bow to God Sambhu who bears on His forehead a digit
of the Moon illumining ali directions by its rays, to Him
whose feet are adored by the gods and who is a source of all
knowledge.’ (MBA, i. 1).

--- Page 23 ---
BHASKARA’S DATE xix

In his commentary on the Aryabhatiya, he writes :

“E bow to God Siva whose lotus-like feet are rubbed by
the foreheads of the lotus-born (Brahma) and Krsna, to Him,
a mere recollection of whose name isa source of fortune and
end of misfortune for gods, demons and men.”

«I bow to Sambhu, who is the cause of creation and
destruction of the universe, (the different parts of }) whose
body are the Sun, etc., and who is as effulgent as tens of
thousands of Suns.’”?

“J bow to God Siva, the support of the three worlds, who,
though inconceivable by nature, being mercy incarnate,
assumed the eight forms, viz., the Sun, the Moon, Ether, Fire,
Air, Water, Earth, and the Sacrificer, for the good of the
entire world.’

In the beginning of his commentary on the first and fourth
chapters of the Aryabhatiya, however, Bhaskara I, instead of paying
_ obeisance to God Siva, has paid obeisance to God Brahma. This is
“due to the fact that Aryabhata I, whom Bhaskara I has followed, has
paid obeisance to God Brahma as the founder of the school.

   

2, BHASKARA’S DATE

At two places in his commentary on the Aryabhatiya, Bhaskara I
has mentioned the time elapsed since the beginning of the current
Kalpa (aeon). Under the 9th stanza of the first chapter, he writes :

“Since the beginning of the current Ka/pa, the number of
years elapsed is this: zero, three, seven, three, twelve, six,
eight, nine, one (proceeding from right to left) years. The
same (years) in figures are 1986123730."

ne

1. This is the opening stanza of Bhaskara V’s comm. on the
second chapter of the Aryabhatiya. See p. 43.

2. This stanza occurs in Bhaskara I’s comm. on A, ii. 32-33.
See p. 156.

3. This is the opening stanza of Bhaskara I’s comm. on A, iii.
See p. 172.

. wens techraaraay geaufatealfea: aia UAH Tage Aa: |
WET ceserrgege | Sce p. 34,

--- Page 24 ---
ss INTRODUCTION

Under the same stanza, he again writes :

“The time elapsed, in terms of years, since the commencement
of the current Kalpa is zero, three, seven, three, twelve, six,
eight, nine, one. The same (years written in figures) are
1986123730."

Now, the number of years elapsed since the beginning of the
current Kalpa at the commencement of Kaliyuga (according to Arya-
bhata I) (A, i. 5) ,

==6 Manus--273 yugas

=6%X 72 yugas + 272 yugas

=(6 x 72 +272) X 4320000 years
== (1866240000-4- 119880000) years
== 1986120000 years.

Therefore, the number of years elapsed since the beginning of
Kaliyuga at the time of writing the commentary

=1986123730—1986120000 years
:=3730 years.

The year when 3730 years of Kaliyuga had elapsed was the
year 629 of the Christian era. Bhaskara ’s commentary on the
Aryabhativa was, therefore, written in 629 A.D., i.e., exactly one year
after Brahmagupta wrote his Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta.?

21. Datta’s conjecture

In a transcript of the Laghu-Bhaskariya procured by B. Datta
from the Government Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras,* there
occurs, in the first chapter, between verses 17 and 18, a verse containing
the so-called Sakabda correction.£ The epoch used in that verse is
the year 444 of the Saka era, which corresponds to 522 A.D. On the
basis of that-verse, Datta’ supposed that the Laghu-Bhaskariya was

 

 

1, woqawefdard aanta: aTeaiwapwmageaar 1 at
PEGERAZOQoO | See p. 37.

2. See BrSpSi, xxiv. 7-8.

3. Ms. No. 13474.

4. See Laghu-Bhaskariya, ed. by K.S. Shukla, Lucknow Uni-
versity, Lucknow, Introduction, pp. iii-iv.

5. See B. Datta, The two Bhaskaras, I1HQ, Vol. VI, 1930,
pp. 727-36. .

--- Page 25 ---
 
 

BHASKARA’S DATE xxi

composed in that year. The same opinion was later held by B.D.
Apte?, who edited the Maha-Bhaskariya and the Laghu-Bhaskariya
along with the Sanskrit commentaries of Parameévara, although the
verse in question is not to be found in the place referred to by him in
his edition of the Laghu-Bhaskariya.

Subsequently, three more manuscripts of the Laghu-Bhaskariya were
acquired by the present writer : (1) containing the text together with the
commentary of Sankarandrayana (A.D. 869), (2) containing the text
together with the commentary of Udayadivakara (A.D. 1073), and
(3) containing the text together with the commentary of Paramesvara
(A.D. 1431). The verse in question does not form part of the text in any
one of these manuscripts. In the commentaries of Sankaranarayana and
Udayadivakara, there is no trace of the verse nor of the subject matter.
The verse is present in Paramegvara’s commentary,? but from certain
remarks made by Parameévara it is evident that it has been inserted
by him as a quotation and does not form part of the text of the
Laghu-Bhaskariya#

. There are other conclusive grounds against the said verse being
a composition of Bhaskara I :

1. The correction stated in that verse is not found to occur
in the author’s bigger work, the Maha-Bhaskariya, nor in
his commentary on the Aryabhatiya.

a

 

1. Sce introductions to his editions of the Laghu-Bhaskariya
and the Maha-Bhaskariya, Anandagrama, Poona, 1946, 1945.

2. On LBA, i. 37.

3. Paramesvara quotes that verse to explain the correction
depending on time, and he introduces it by saying : “And that correc-
tion which should be applied on the basis of time (elapsed since some
corns epoch) is being exhibited by us.” In addition to the
othe, nan stated in the verse in question, Paramegvara refers to similar
havin vccctions also (such as Manuyuga and Kalpa corrections). And
tions): ace t with that topic, he further remarks : “(These correc-
the La hak mubject to variation, have not been included in the text (of
4 ghu-Bhaskariya).” Obviously, the verse under consideration

oes not belong to the Laghu-Bhaskariya.

co It may be added that Paramegvara quotes the said verse in his
wherein on verse 37 of the first chapter and not under verse 17
ere it is found to occur in the transcript acquired by Datta.

--- Page 26 ---
xxii INTRODUCTION

2. The system of numeral notation which has been followed
in that verse is different from that followed in the other
verses of the Laghu-Bhaskariya or in the other works of
Bhaskara I. In all the works that Bhaskara I has written,
he has always expressed numbers by means of words, but
in the verse in question numbers have been expressed by
means of letters of the Sanskrit alphabet following the

' katapayadi system of notation.

3. The language and style of that verse are not in conformity
with the rest of the Laghu-Bhaskariya.

From what has been said above it is clear that the verse
referred to does not belong to the Laghu-Bhaskariya and that A.D. 522
cannot be the date of composition of that work and likewise the
date of Bhaskara I. Moreover, Paramesvara designates the correction
stated in that verse by the name Bhatabda,® i.e., ‘Aryabhata era
correction’. If Paramegvara is right, then the year 444 of the Saka
era may relate to some eventful year in the life of Aryabhata I and has
nothing to do with the time of Bhaskara 18

2:2. Not a direct pupil of Aryabhata I

Bhaskara I claims, in his works, to be a follower of Aryabhata
I and at one place‘ in his commentary mentions the names of
Panduranga-svami, Latadeva, and Nigaiku amongst direct pupils of
of Aryabhata I. These considerations led the earlier scholars, such

1. For the katapayadi notation, see B. Datta and A.N. Singh,
History of Hindu Mathematics, Part 1, Lahore, 1935, pp. 69-72.

2. See Paramesvara’s commentary on LBA, i. 37.

3. According to Paramesvara, there are two corrections
bearing the name Bhatabda. The one is the same as stated in the
verse considered above (i.e., the Sekabda correction with epoch at
Saka 444); the other is probably the one ascribed to Lalla (with
epoch at Saka 421). For the sake of convenience in calculation
Lalla takes the epoch at Saka 420 instead of Saka 421. See Suryadeva’s
commentary on A, iii. 10. Also see Parameévara’s commentary on
the same verse. Reference to Bhatabda with epoch at Saka 421 has
also been made by the commentator Nilakantha (1500 A.D.). See his
commentary on A, tii. 16.

4. Comm. on A, iii. 10. Seep. 202,

--- Page 27 ---
BHASKARA'S DATE gail

as P.C. Sengupta! and B.D. Apte?, to presume that Bhaskara I was a
direct pupil of Aryabhata I. But as Bhaskara I wrote his commentary
onthe Aryabhatiya in 629 A.D., i.e, 130 years after Aryabhata I
wrote the Aryabhatiya, he cannot be a direct pupil of Aryabhata I.

Amongst other proofs may be mentioned the following :

1. Inthe second stanza of the Laghu-Bhaskariya, Bhaskara I
writes :

“Victorious is Aryabhata whose excellent fame has crossed
the bounds of the oceans and whose (treatise on astro-
nomical) science leads to accurate results in far off places
(even) after the lapse of so much time.”

The phrase “after the lapse of so much time” clearly shows
that Bhaskara I was far removed in time from Aryabhata I

’ and there is little possibility of his having been a contem-
porary of Aryabhata I.

2. Nowhere in the works of Bhaskara I is there any reference
to knowledge directly acquired by him from Aryabhata I.
On the other hand, there are several references to the
pupils and followers of Aryabhata I who lived prior to
him. On several occasions he accepts the authority of the
followers of Aryabhata I.4

 

3. Many of Bhaskara I’s opinions relating to Aryabhata I
are based on traditional authority. Thus, for example, in
his commentary on the Aryabhatiya, he writes :

 

(i) “This is what one hears said: Indeed this Acdrya
(i.e., Aryabhatal) worshipped God Brahma by per-
forming severe penance, so to him, by His grace, was
revealed the science of true motion of the planets.’

ee ces

I. Sce introduction to his English translation of the Khanda-

Riadyaka, PP. xuil-xiv. Also, see Appendix HI, Hindu epicyclic theory,

2. See introductions to his editions of the Maha-Bhaskariya
and the Laghu-Bhaskariya.

3. See MBh, i. 3, 21 ; ii. 5,7; comm. on A, ii. 14, p. 88.
4. For example, see MBA, ii. 5,7; comm. on A, ii. 14, p. 88.
5. See comm. on A, i. 2, p. Il.

--- Page 28 ---
kxig

et

INTRODUCTION

(ii) “This is what one hears said: Indeed this Syayam-
bhuya-siddhanta was honoured by the learned people
of Kusumapura (Pataliputra or modern Patna in Bihar),
although the Pauliga, Romaka, Vasistha and Saurya
Siddhantas were also (known) there. That is why the

author (Aryabhata I) says ‘the knowledge honoured at
Kusumapura.’ °*

Similarly, many of Bhaskara I’s views are based on ‘conti-
nuity of tradition.” Thus, for example, he writes :

(i) “The old people remember their yuga revolutions from
continuity of tradition.’”

(ii) “The motion of their apogees (aphelions) being very
slow, whatever (motion) has been stated by Acarya
(Aryabhata I) corresponding to periods in years is being
stated (here) as acquired from the continuity of
tradition.’

Bhaskara I refers to two traditions regarding the origin of
the science of astronomy contained in the Arysbhatiya :4

(i) That it was acquired by AryabhataI by the grace of
God Brahma.

(ii) That it was created by Aryabhata I himself on the basis
of observation and inference. -

Bhaskara I is not sure of either, but he prefers the former
and rejects the latter, because he feels that the knowledge
of laws governing the planetary phenomena could not be
acquired by any individual by observations made during his
lifetime. Had he been a direct pupil of Aryabhaya I, he
must have definitely known about the sources of the
Aryabhatiya.

Some of the interpretations given by BhaskaraI are quite
unsatisfactory and exhibit his misunderstanding of the text of
the Aryabhatiya. For example, his interpretation of verse 20
of the Kalakriya-pada is far from being satisfactory and so
no subsequent commentator (except SomeSvara who simply

 

1.

See comm. on A, ii. 1, p. 46.

2. See comm. on A, i. 9, p. 34.
3. See comm. on A, i. 9, p. 36.

4. See comm. on A, i. 2, p. 11 ff.

--- Page 29 ---
BHASKARA’S PLACE xav

summarises him) has accepted it. Moreover, as regards the
rule given in verse 12 of the Ganita-pada, Bhaskara I exhibits
total misunderstanding and declares the rule as useless. He
criticises the interpretation given by an earlier commentator
Prabhakara, but he himself avoids interpreting it. This
cannot be expected from a direct pupil of Aryabhata I.

7, Although Bhaskara I has mentioned some reading-differences
of the Aryabhatiya and has interpreted the text with
reference to them also, he is quite silent regarding the
reading “‘pranenaiti kalam bheh” which was criticised by his
contemporary Brahmagupta (A.D. 628) and which has been
mentioned at least twice by Prthidaka (A.D. 860) in his
commentary on the Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta' and also by
Udayadivakara (A. D. 1073) in his commentary on the
Laghu-Bhaskariya (i. 32-33). This shows that Bhaskara I
lived long after Aryabhata 1 when the above reading was
discarded in his school and replaced by “‘pranenaiti kalam
bham” under the pressure of Varahamihira’s criticism of the
theory of the Earth’s rotation advocated by Aryabhata I.

3. BHASKARA’S PLACE

Bhaskara I does not mention the name of the place where he
was born, brought up and educated, or of the place where he settled
in later life and wrote his works. There are, however, reasons to
believe that he belonged to the Asmaka country but lived and taught at
Valabhi in Surastra (modern Saurastra or Kathiawar) where he wrote
his commentary on the Aryabhatiya.

31. Asmaka

Bhaskara I has referred to the country of ASmaka at several
places in more than one context :

1. “Given that 100 minutes of the eighth sign are to be
traversed by the Sun, say quickly, after giving careful
thought, O intelligent one, if the Ganita of Aémaka
(asmokasya ganitam) is known to you, all the years that
have elapsed this day since the beginning of Kaliyuga. Also

To

1. Under xi. 17 and xxi. 30,

 

A. Bh. 4

--- Page 30 ---
BHASKARA’S PLACE xxvii

4, “The (mean) longitude of the Sun for midnight is found to
be 9 signs, 15 degrees, 32 minutes, and 40 seconds. Quickly
say the ahargana and the revolutions (performed by the Sun)

according to the Asmakiya.”*

8. “The residue of the revolutions of the meridian Sun, who
has brightened up the faces of the quarters by the bundle
of its brilliant rays, is seen to be 154790. Let the
ahargana and the revolutions performed (by the Sun) in
that time be given out by one who has properly studied the
indeterminate analysis taught in the ASmaktya.””

The word Asmaka in the first two passages is used as a synonym
of Aryabhata I. The word Asmaka in the third passage similarly
means ‘pertaining to Aryabhata 1.’ The word Aémakiya in the fourth
and fifth passages means ‘a follower of Aryabhata I.’ The same word
in the sixth, seventh and eighth passages means ‘the Aryabhatiya.’
‘The accurate Asmaka-tantra’ in the third passage and ‘the ocean of
the ‘Asmakiya-sastras’ in the fifth passage also mean ‘the Arya-
bhatiya.’

The mention of these words shows that Aryabhata I was an
A$maka. The question is: What led Bhaskara I to call Aryabhata I
by the unusual name ASmaka, his Aryabhatiya by the names Asgmaka-
tantra and Agmakiya, and his followers by the designation Asmakiyah
in preference to the usual names ? It seems that the astronomers of the
Agmaka country, of whom Bhaskara I was one, were followers of
Aryabhata I. For patriotic reasons, they called Aryabhata I by the
name Aémaka (because he was an Aémaka, having originated from
that country) and themselves as ‘followers of Agmaka’ (Asmakiyah).
As Datta has observed, Bhaskara I was undoubtedly the most competent
exponent of this school of astronomy (the Agmaka school).

The ASmaka country (or ASmaka-janapada) is mentioned in
Hindu, Buddhist and Jaina literatures, where it means either (1) a

—_— ——

 

1. See comm. on A, ii. 32-33, Ex. 18, p. 147.
2.  Ibid., Ex. 20, See p. 148.

--- Page 31 ---
BHASKARA’S PLACE xav

summarises him) has accepted it. Moreover, as regards the
rule given in verse 12 of the Ganita-pada, Bhaskara I exhibits
total misunderstanding and declares the rule as useless. He
criticises the interpretation given by an earlier commentator
Prabhakara, but he himself avoids interpreting it. This
cannot be expected from a direct pupil of Aryabhata I.

7, Although Bhaskara I has mentioned some reading-differences
of the Aryabhatiya and has interpreted the text with
reference to them also, he is quite silent regarding the
reading “‘pranenaiti kalam bheh” which was criticised by his
contemporary Brahmagupta (A.D. 628) and which has been
mentioned at least twice by Prthidaka (A.D. 860) in his
commentary on the Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta' and also by
Udayadivakara (A. D. 1073) in his commentary on the
Laghu-Bhaskariya (i. 32-33). This shows that Bhaskara I
lived long after Aryabhata 1 when the above reading was
discarded in his school and replaced by “‘pranenaiti kalam
bham” under the pressure of Varahamihira’s criticism of the
theory of the Earth’s rotation advocated by Aryabhata I.

3. BHASKARA’S PLACE

Bhaskara I does not mention the name of the place where he
was born, brought up and educated, or of the place where he settled
in later life and wrote his works. There are, however, reasons to
believe that he belonged to the Asmaka country but lived and taught at
Valabhi in Surastra (modern Saurastra or Kathiawar) where he wrote
his commentary on the Aryabhatiya.

31. Asmaka

Bhaskara I has referred to the country of ASmaka at several
places in more than one context :

1. “Given that 100 minutes of the eighth sign are to be
traversed by the Sun, say quickly, after giving careful
thought, O intelligent one, if the Ganita of Aémaka
(asmokasya ganitam) is known to you, all the years that
have elapsed this day since the beginning of Kaliyuga. Also

To

1. Under xi. 17 and xxi. 30,

 

A. Bh. 4

--- Page 32 ---
xxviii INTRODUCTION

territory in the north-west of India,} or (2) a country lying between
the rivers Godavari and Narmada? The Aémaka of Bhaskara I
was evidently the latter one, as is suggested by the fact that
Bhaskara I wrote his commentary on the Aryabhatiya at Valabhi
(ia Surastra, modern Saurastra or Kathiawar),

en ert rei ee

1. The Agmaka in the north-west of India is mentioned in the
Astadhyayi of Panini, the Ramayona and the Mahabharata. According
to Rhys Davids and V.S. Agrawala, it was situated immediately to the
north-west of Avanti. Asanga in his Mahayana-Sutralankara mentions
it as a territory on the basin of the Indus. In the Rurma-purana, it is
mentioned in connection with the countries of the Panjab. Varaha-
mihira, in his Byhat-samhita (xiv. 22), places it in the north-west division
of India. According to H. Kern, it was the ‘Assakonoi’ of the Grecks
which lay to the east of river Sarasvati ata distance of about twenty-
five miles from the sea on the Swat valley. The same Asmaka is
mentioned in the Markandeya-purana.

2. In the time of the Buddha, a branch of the ASmakas of the
north-west had established a settlement on the banks of the Godavari
(cf, Govindasutta in Dighanikaya, xix. 36), which is mentioned in the
Anguttaranikaya (1, p. 213; IV, pp. 252, 256 and 260) as Assaka
(=Asmaka) Mahajanapada (‘the great republic of Aémaka’). According
to the ‘History of Bawari’ in Spence Hardy’s Manual of Buddhism, the
Suttanipata and the Parayanavagga, this Assaka (Agsmaka) was
situated between the river Godavari and Mahissati (=Mahismati,
Modern MaheSvara in Nimara District, Indore) on the Narmada. Its
capital was Pratisthana (modern Paithan, called Potana or Potali by
the Buddhists and Paitthana or Poyanapura by the Jainas) situated
south-east of Aurangabad on the north bank of an affluent of river
Godavari. The same Aémaka appeats in the Mehavastu (Vol. 3,
p. 208). It is also mentioned in the Yasastilaka-campii (Book III,
p. 567). Asmaka became a part of the Maharastra country in the time
of Agcka. The Desckumara-carita (ch. VI). written in the sixth century
by Dandin, describes it as a dependent kingdom of Vidarbha. It is
also mentioned in the Hersa-carita of Bana. According to the Vayu-
Purana and the Brahmanda-purana, ASmaka was one of the countries
of South India (daksinatya). Bhattasvamin, commentator of Kautilya’s
Arthasastra, identifies ASmaka with Maharastra. Agmaka is also
mentioned in several inscriptions. For example, see Arch. Surv. West
India, vol. WV, p. 131; Nasik Cave Inscription, No. 3; and other
inscriptions of a later age in Arch. Surv. North India, vol. I, p. 133.

--- Page 33 ---
BHASKARA’S PLACE sxix

32. Valabhi

In Bhaskara I’s commentary on the Aryabhatiya (ii. 31), there
are two illustrative examples which probably throw light on the place
where he wrote that commentary. These examples are :

1. “One (man) goes from Valabhi at the speed of 1} yojanas
aday ; another (man) comes (along the same route) from
Harukaccha at the speed of 14 yojanas a day. The distance
between the two (places) is known to be [8 yojanas. Say,
O mathematician, after how much time (since start) they
meet each other.’’

2. “One man goes from Valabhi to the Ganges at the speed
of 14 yojanug aday, and at the same time another man
proceeds from Sivabhagapura at the speed of 2/3 yojana a
day. The distance between the two (places) has been
stated to be 24 yojanas. If they travel along the same
route, after how much time will they meet (each other) ?”

All the three places mentioned in the above examples were in
Kathiawar. Reference to the above three places in preference to other
places in other parts of India appears to indicate that Bhaskara
I wrote his commentary on the Aryabhatiya in that country. Special
predilection for the town of Valabhi in the two examples, and the use
of the verb ‘goes’ in relation to the traveller starting from Valabhi and
‘comes’ in relation to the traveller starting from Harukaccha (in the
first example), again, seems to indicate that Bhaskara Is commentary
was written in the town of Valabhi.

Valabhi was situated in Kathiawar on the western shore of the
eulf of Cambay, 18 miles to the north west of Bhaunagar (Bhava-
nagara). In the seventh century A.D., it was the capital of the
prosperous kingdom of Surastra and a university seat of Buddhist
learning. The country of Surastra was ruled for a long time by kings
who were Buddhists. At the time of Yuan Chwang’s visit to India
(October 630 A.D. to July 644 A.D.), it was ruled by a Ksatriya king
Dhruvabhatta, a nephew of Siladitya, the former king of Malava, and
a son-in-law of Siladitya reigning at Kanyakubja (Kannauja).1 According
to Yuan Chwang, Valabhi was a great seat of learning. It had a number
of Buddhist monasteries and also a large number of Hindu temples.

wee

1. Cf. T. Watters, On Yuan Chwang’s Travels in India, edited
by T.W. Rhys Davids and S.W. Bushell, vol. I], London, 1905, p. 246,

--- Page 34 ---
xxx INTRODUCTION

The king, though a Buddhist, encouraged Hindu sciences and culture.
Bhaskara I might have been a court astronomer of Dhruvabhatt a.

The above surmise is further supported by Bhdskara I’s reference
to Surastra in his commentary. In connection with the difference
prevailing amongst the various schools of Hindu astronomy and peoples
of Bharatavarsa about the beginning of the year, month, etc , Bhaskara
I observes :

1. “In Surastra the year, month, and day begin from Kartika-
sukla-pratipad (i.e., from the first tithi of the light half of
the month Kartika) and end on Asvayuja-krsna-paticadasi
(i.e., on the fifteenth fithi of the dark half of the month
Agvina) and in Magadha the year, month, and day begin
from Asadha-krsna-pratipad (i.e., from the first tithi
of the dark half of the month Asadha) and end on Asadha-
sita-paficadasi (i.e., the fifteenth tithi_ of the light half of the
month Asadha).”!

2. “There do exist countries which use months ending in
dark fortnight. These are Surastra, etc.’

Of the various ycar-beginnings prevalent in Bharatavarsa,® is
it a mere chance that he mentioned only the two current in Surastra
and Magadha? Or, does it signify something more than that ?
Magadha was the country which, in the near past, had the privilege
of having, at Pataliputra, the mighty capital of the Gupta kings. More-
over, Pataliputra (Kusumapura) in Magadha was the place where Arya-
bhata I wrote his Aryabhatiya. So it was but natural for his follower
Bhaskara Ito refer to that country. But what led him to mention
Surastra in preference to other countries ? Does it not show that he
lived and wrote his commentary there ?

4. BHASKARA’S WORKS
41. Known works
Up till now we know of three works of Bhaskara 1, They are:

(1) Maha-Bhaskariya, (2) Laghu-Bhaskariya, and
(3) Aryabhatiya-bhasya.

 

1. See comm. on A, iii. 11, p. 206.
2. See comm. on A, iii. 11, p. 207.

3. See S.B. Diksita, Bharatiya Jyotisasastra (Marathi), second
edition, pp. 381 ff.

--- Page 35 ---
BHASKARA'’S WORKS girl

The first is termed by the author Aryabhata-karma-nibandha in
its penultimate verse :

“This Aryabhata-karma-nibandha, which has clear expressions
and simple methods (of calculation) and which can be
comprehended even by those with lesser intellect, is written
by Bhaskara after full deliberation.”

In the last mentioned work Bhaskara I has referred to his Karma-
nibandha more than once. E.g. :

. “This very procedure has been stated by us in the Karma-
nibandha.’*

“This very pratyabda-sodhan1 has been set forth by us ina
more condensed form in the Karma-nibandha.””

“This entire calculation of the planets also has been exhibited
in a more condensed form in the Karma-nibandha.’”*

“This very method has been briefly stated by us in the
Karma-nibandha.”*

He has also quoted several passages from it.’ Ail of them are
found to be from the Aryabhata-karma-nibandha or Maha-Bhaskariya.
So, it appears that the author was used to call his Aryabhata-karma-
nibandha briefly Karma-nibandha.

The concluding stanza of the second mentioned work is :
“For acquiring a knowledge of the true motion of the planets
by those who are afraid of reading voluminous works, the
Karma-nibandha has been briefly told by Bhaskara.”

ee

1, gama watenifa: aifaaed ga 1 See comm. on A, ii. 31,
p. 131.

2. vata sensaeitary aenifa: aifraet aqat sfatfary | See
comm. on A, iii. 10, p. 203.

_ 3. Ramatangitad HH ayTTHA aufarad saferary 1 See comm.
on A, iii. 10, p. 205.

4. wata mq aatoremnfa: sifsat seHAy1 See comm. on A,
iii. 21, p. 225.

; 5. The passages quoted are: MBh, i. 22-23; 27-28, 30-31;
iv . 36, 45-51, 64 ; vi. 49-51, 55 (a-b) ; vii. 17-19 (a-b).

--- Page 36 ---
xeril iNTRODUCTION

So it is an abridged version of his former work Karma-nibandha.

The commentators of these works, however, have called them
Bhaskeriya (‘works of Bhaskara’) and have distinguished them by
the qualifying adjectives maha (‘large, extensive’) or brhat (‘large’) and
laghu (‘small, short’) or samksipta (‘abridged or brief’) — Maha-
Bhaskariya or Brhad-Bhaskariya and Laghu-Bhaskartya or Samksipta-
Bhaskariya. And these names became current later on.

Commentator Sankarandrayana (869 A.D.) has called them
Grahakarmanibandha too, and has distinguished them as Brhat-
(graha)-karmanibandha and Samksi pta-graha-karma-nibandha. These
names are found also in the commentary of Udayadivakara (1073
A.D.).2. These two works of Bhaskara I, as their original names by
the author imply, are compendiums (nibandha) of the astronomical
processes (karma) taught by Aryabhata I.

The third known work of Bhaskara I, is, as its name implies,
a commentary (bhasya or vyakhya) of the Aryabtatiya (‘work of
Aryabhata ) and is made up of two parts: (i) Dasagitika-sutra-
vyakhya and (ii) Aryabhata-tantra-bhasya.

From cross references to the three works in one another it is
evident that they are from the pen of the same writer (Bhaskara I).

4-2. No other work

Sankarandrayana (869 A.D.) states, in the introductory remarks
to his commentary on the Laghu-Bhaskariya, that Bhaskara (the author
of the Laghu-Bhaskariya) wrote three compositions (niband hana-traya)
in exposition of the Aryabhatiya, which are (1) the Maha-Bhaskariya,
(2) the Laghu-Bhaskartya, and (3) a commentary on the Aryabhatiya.
Other writers have also ascribed to Bhaskara I the authorship of the
same three works only. So it appears that BhaskaraI wrote the
above mentioned three works only.

 

wee

1. Grahakarma-nibandha: Comm. on LBh, viii. 19. Brhat-
(graha)-karma-nibandha ; Comm. on LBh, ii. 26, 27, 33; iii. 1-3 ; v. 45
vii. 1-2 ; viii. 4, 17, 18, 19. Samksi pta-grahakarma-nibandha : Comm.
on LBh, i, opening lines ; viii. 19. Sankaranarayana has also called
the works of Bhiaskara I as Graha-karma-nibandhana (Comm. on LBh,
i. opening lines). Likewise he has called the larger work Brhat-(graha)-
karma-nibandhana. See his comm. on LBA, viii. 1-3.

2. Graha-karma-nibandha: Comm. on LBh, opening lines.
Maha-(graha)-karma-nibindha : Comm. on LBA, ii. 9-10.

--- Page 37 ---
BHASKARA’S WORKS axxtii

4:3. Chronological order

Sankaranarayana tells us that Bhaskara I first wrote his
commentary on the Aryabhatiya, then the Maha-Bhaskariva, and
thereafter the Laghu-Bhaskariya. The first part of his statement, viz.,
that the commentary on the Aryabhatiya was written earlier than the
Maha-Bhaskariya, is incorrect. For Bhaskara I himself has referred
to his Karma-nibandha or Maha-Bhaskariya in his commentary on the
Aryabhatiya. The Laghu-Bhaskariya seems to have been written
after the commentary on the Aryabhatiya, as is suggested by the
following facts :

1. The Laghu-Bhaskariya bears traces of marked improvement

in language, style and contents over the other two works.

te

The two examples on the pulveriser set in the Laghu-Bhas-
kariya (viii. 17, 18) are more complicated and more interest-
ing than those given in the Maha-Bhaskariya, and the
commentary, and do not seem to have occurred to Bhaskara
lat the time of writing those two works.

3. The commentary refers to and quotes several passages from
the Karma-nibandha (Maha-Bhaskariya), but there is no
reference to the Laghu-Bhaskariya or any quotation from
that work.

T.S. Kuppanna Sastri’s statement® that the Laghu-Bhaskariya is
quoted in Bhaskara I’s commentary on the Aryabhatiya is not borne
out by facts. Likewise, his conclusion that Bhaskara I’s commentary on
the Aryabhatiya was his last work is not correct. The following seems,
therefore, to be the chronological order of the three works of Bhaskara
I: (1) Maha-Bhaskariya, (2) Commentary on the Aryabhatiy;,
(3) Laghu-Bhaskariya.

4-4, Importance

The works of Bhaskara I contain detailed exposition of the
astronomy briefly set forth in the Aryabhatiya of Aryabhata I and
later developed by his disciples of the ASmaka school to which the
author himself belonged, and throw light on the development of Hindu

—_——_,

 

1. See the opening lines of Sankaranarayana’s comm. on LBA.

2. See p. xx, lines 9-10, of the introduction to his edition of
the Maha-Bhaskariya.

A. Bh, 5

--- Page 38 ---
ixziv INTRODUCTION

astronomy in the sixth and seventh centuries A.D. Apart from their
historical importance, they possess the merit of being standard works
on the subject. The Laghu-Bhaskariya and the Maha-Bhaskariya
continued to be studied as text-books on astronomy up to the end of
the fifteenth century A-D., or even after, and a number of commen-
taries were written on them. Quotations from the works of Bhaskara I
occur in later writings up to the sixteenth century A.D. A work known
as Vakya-karana, written about 1300 A.D., on the basis of the larger
work of Bhaskara I, ‘attempts to present a simplified version of the
teachings contained in that work for the benefit of the pavicanga-makers.
The greatest testimony to the excellence of the writings of Bhaskara I
is the survival of his works for more than thirteen hundred years.
Although scores of text-books were written, none of them succeeded in
replacing the works of Bhaskara I,

45. Appreciation

The works of Bhaskara I were highly appreciated in South India,
particularly Kerala and the neighbouring states. In Kerala, the
Maha-Bhaskariya and the Laghu-Bhaskariya were recognized as text-
books par excellence and were taught to students from the seventh
century A.D. right up to the end of the fifteenth century A.D. As early
as 689 A.D., we find the South Indian astronomer Deva incorporating
four and a half verses from the Laghu-Bhaskariya in his Karana-ratna.
The popularity of the above works of Bhaskara I necessitated the
composition of commentaries on them. A number of commentaries
were written and all these commentators, excepting Suryadeva (b. 1191
A.D.) and Makkibhatta (1377 A.D.), belonged to Kerala. These
commentators themselves learnt astronomy through the works of
Bhaskara I and regarded BhaskaraI as their parama-guru. Thus,
commentator Sankaranarayana, while paying homage to ancient
teachers in the beginning of his commentary on the La ghu-Bhaskariya,
addresses Bhaskara I as Srimad-guru :

“Having paid homage by properly lowering my head to
Acarya Aryabhata, Varahamihira, Srimad-guru Bhaskara,
Govinda and Haridatta, I give out, ...”

So also says commentator Udayadivakara :

“Having bowed to Murari, the lord of the entire world, and
having paid respectful homage to Acarya Aryabhata, I write
an extensive exposition of the smaller work on astronomy
composed by Guru Bhaskara.”

--- Page 39 ---
BHASKARA’S WORKS -X2XV

Bhaskara I’s commentary on the Aryzbhatiya was recognized
as a work of great scholarship and its author was known as sary. jia-
bhasyakara (‘all-knowing commentator’). It is to be noted that
Bhaskara I himself, on the other hand, observes towards the end of his
commentary :

“These aphorisms, written by Aryabhata, deal with matters
beyond the reach of the senses. It is impossible for people
like us to explain even one-hundredth part of their meaning,
not to say of the whole.”

The study of Bhaskara I’s commentary on the Aryabhatiya did
not remain confined to South India. There are reasons to believe that
it was popular in North India also at an earlier age. Prthddaka, who
lived at Kannauj in Uttara Pradesh, in his commentary on the Brahma-
sphuta-siddhanta of Brahmagupta, refers to Bhaskara I and his inter-
pretations of the rules of Aryabhata I as many as four times.

5. MAHA-BHASKARIYA

The Maha-Bhaskariya is, as explained, the earliest work of
Bhaskara I. The author asserts that it is “a compendium of the
astronomical processes based on the teachings of Aryabhata I.”
Hence the commentators of the work have called it a vrtti (‘an
exposition in verse’) of the Aryabhatiya. Thus Govinda-svami says :

“Acarya Aryabhata gave in his Aryabhatiya an excellent
summary of the tantra based on the teachings of Brahma
(Pitamaha) ; a vrtti thereof was written in detail (in the Maha-
Bhaskariya) by Bhaskara for the benefit of the dull-witted.
The meaning of that yrtfi too is, (now), not understood by
those with lesser intellect, and so a detailed exposition of
that vrtti, which I heard from the mouth of my teacher, is
being set forth by me, Govinda by name.’

So also writes Paramegvara :

“Acarya Aryabhata wrote a fantra based on the teachings of
Brahma (Vidhi) ; thereafter Bhaskara wrote a yrtti (of that
work) in detail: and subsequently Govinda wrote a bhasya
(comprehensive exposition) of that yrtti. The meaning of that

 

1. These references occur in his comm. on BrSpSi, xi. 22, 26.
2. This is the concluding stanza of his comm. on MBA.

--- Page 40 ---
xxxvi INTRODUCTION

bhasya too is not clear to those with lesser intellect. So, I have
written a small expository commentary (of that bkasya) by
the grace of God Siva.”!

It is found that certain rules (of the Maha-Bhaskariya) have
been expressly ascribed to Aryabhata I,? and that certain other rules are
quoted from the Aryebhatiya, though Bhaskara I has not specifically
stated so.2 Bhaskara [has referred also to the writings of the pupils
of AryabhataI4 Obviously, he utilised their works. Reference to
other astronomers is also made, and rules given by them are sometimes
mentioned.’ But, certainly there are his own contributions too. For
instance, he has claimed to be the first Aémakiya (‘exponent of the
Agmaka school’) to have given a simplified method for obtaining the
mean positions of the planets on the basis of the pratyabda-suddhi®

5-1. Contents of the Maha-Bhaskariya

The Maha-Bhaskariya deals with the following topics :

(1) Mean positions of the planets, (2) True positions and
true velocities of the planets and their applications,
(3) Directions, time and place, (4) Computation and graphi-
cal representation of the eclipses, (5) Heliacal and diurnal
risings of the Moon and the elevation of the lunar horns,
(6) Heliacal rising and the conjunction of the planets, and
(7) Conjunction of a planet with a star. These are the main
topics of an astronomical tantra, to which the Maha-
Bhaskariya belongs.

 

1. This is the penultimate stanza of the commentary Siddhanta-
dipika on Govindasvami's M ahabhaskariya-Bhasya.

2. For example, see MBh, i. 19; iii. 41; v. 1, 11,12. Also
sce MBh, i. 9, where reference is made to the astronomical constants
given in the Gitika-pada of the Aryabhatiya.

3. For example, see MBA, iii. 37-38, which is exactly the same
as A, iv. 32. It is noteworthy that both rules contain the same error.
Also see MBh, vii. 16, where quotation is made of A, i. 12. It may
be mentioned that the astronomical constants and methods given in the
Aryabhatiya have been adopted in the Maha-Bhaskariya without
making any alteration or change in them.

4. See MBA, ii. 5, 7.

5. See, for instance, MBA, ii. 3-4, 6, and v. 74.

6. See MBA, 1. 21.

--- Page 41 ---
BHASKARA’S WORKS * gxxvil

The treatment of each topic is fairly exhaustive. The author
aims at making the subject easy and clear to the learner by introducing
alternative methods and rules based on different principles. For
instance, the author is not satisfied by giving one or two rules for finding
the mean position of a planet. He gives several rules based on different
principles so that the student may have a clear grasp of the subject.
Similarly, the author, unlike the other astronomers, is not satisfied by
giving the method for calculating the true positions of the planets
based on the epicyclic theory only. He lays equal emphasis on the
methods based on the eccentric theory. In the same way, in the sixth
chapter, where the author takes up for consideration the elevation of
the Junar horns and moonrise, he does not deem it sufficient to state
the general methods and leave the rest for the student. He goes into
the details of the methods to be followed in the four quarters of a
lunar month and in some cases also provides alternative methods.
Whenever possible, he also gives simplified rules which may be
convenient in practical calculations. In stating the methods regarding
the projection ofa figure, he gives all the necessary details as well as
alternative methods. For example, in the third chapter, where he deals
with the path of the shadow-end, he does not simply say, like other
astronomers, that it is the arc of a circle passing through the three ends
of the shadow, but goes on describing it in detail, explaining how to
find out the three points on the path of the shadow-tip theoretically,
and also suggests an alternative method. In the methods relating to
the projection of the eclipses and the elevation of the lunar horns again
we have the same detailed exposition. At one place, the author gives
a graphic description of a pair of compasses to be used for drawing
a circle— “a pair of compasses, whose smooth and large body is marked
with angulas and the subdivisions thereof, and which is embellished
by the pointed end of a smoothened chalk-stick placed into its mouth.”
All these details have made the subject easy and interesting. At the
same time, the author confidently sets out his ideas. The subject of
planetary motion, about which none of the other Hindu astronomers
seems to be quite clear, has been put forth in this work unhesitatingly
and in an authoritative tone.

In the First chapter (i. 22-39), the author gives a method for
finding the mean position of the planets on the basis of the pratyabda-
Suddhi. The author claims originality for this method and asserts that
this method was unknown to the other exponents of the ASmaka school
who lived and wrote prior to him (i. 21). In his commentary on the
Aryabhatiya (iii. 10), he has ascribed the niethod of the pratyabda-

--- Page 42 ---
sxxvili INTRODUCTION

Suddhi to the followers of the Romaka-siddhinta (romakak), although
he remarks that he has given a simplified method in the Maha-
Bhaskariya. In the Second chapter, while dealing with the determination
of the longitude of a place, he mentions a few rules given by astrono-
mers belonging to other schools and puts forward grounds on which
those rules were criticised and rejected by the followers of Aryabhata I.
In the Fifth chapter he again gives a rule for calculating a lunar eclipse
according to the teachings of the other astronomers. In the Seventh
chapter he points out the differences of the astronomical parameters
of the ‘other tantra’, based on the midnight day-reckoning, of
Aryabhata I. Al! this shows that in writing the Maha-Bhaskariya, the
author has drawn also from sources other than the Aryabhatiya. What
these sources are and to what extent they have been utilized in this
work are questions which we, with our present knowledge, are unable
to answer satisfactorily, because the works on astronomy written before
the time of Bhaskara I are not available.

Detailed discussion of astronomical procedures and inclusion of
relevant matter from other sources have considerably increased the bulk
of the Maha-Bhaskariya. Yt comprises 4034 verses. The number of
verses in Bhaskara II’s Grehaganita, including the chapters dealing with
time-reckoning (kalamana) and malignant phenomena (pata), is 450.
Ifwe exclude these chapters, the number reduces to 397 only. The
number of verses in the Grahaganita of Lalla’s Sisya-dhi-vrddhida is
344 only. This clearly shows that as a work on mathematical
astronomy, the Maha-Bhaskariya is a fairly large work and can be
compared with any siddhanta work written on the subject. The name
Maha-tantra given to it by later writers is quite appropriate.

52. Arrangement of contents

In the Maha-Bhaskariya, Bhaskata I adopts the following order
of treatment, which is remarkably different from the usual order found
in the other Hindu works on astronomy :

Ch. 1. Calculation of the mean longitude.
Ch. 2. Prime meridian and the longitude correction.

Ch. 3. Directions, place and time. Conjunction ofa star with
a planet. Occultation of certain stars by the Moon.

Ch. 4. Calculation of the true longitudes.
Ch. 5. Eclipses of the Sun and the Moon.

Ch. 6. Moon’s rising and phases, heliacal rising of the planets,
and conjunction of the planets.

--- Page 43 ---
BHASKARA'S WORKS isl
Ch. 7. Astronomical parameters.
Ch, 8. Examples.

Like Aryabhata I, the author of the Maha-Bhaskariya gives
the astronomical parameters in a separate chapter. The same method
has been followed in the Siddhanta-Sekhara of Sripati (c. 1039 A. D.).
But whereas Aryabhata I and Sripati have chosen to introduce those
parameters in the opening chapters of their works in the usual Hindu
fashion, Bhaskara I has put them in the end, in the modern style.

The assigning of a separate chapter (Ch. ii) to the discussion of
the methods for finding the longitude of a place and the corresponding
correction to the planets shows how important that subject was
considered by the author of the Maha-Bhaskariya. This is the only
chapter where rules of the earlier writers have been criticised and
emphasis laid on the methods taught by the disciples of Aryabhata I.
It is worthy of note that one of the incorrect rules for the longitude of
a place, which is said to have been already criticised by the pupils of
Aryabhata I, actually occurs as the only rule in the Brahma-sphuta-
siddhanta (i. 37-38) of Brahmagupta. It seems that, in spite of the criti-
cism made by the disciples of Aryabhata I, these rules went on being
used. This probably accounts for the great stress laid on the subject
by the author of the Maha-Bhaskariya. But even this had little effect
and so when Bhaskara I wrote his smaller work, the Laghu-Bhaskariya,
he treated this subject in greater detail.

The insertion of Ch. iii, dealing with the determination of the
directions, place and time on the basis of the shadow of the gnomon,
before Ch. iv, which deals with the calculation of the true longitudes
and true daily motions of the planets, is an important deviation from
the usual order of treatment. This is just the reverse of the order
followed in other works on Hindu astronomy. Another noteworthy
departure from the usual practice is the appendage of the verses dealing
with the conjunction of the planets with the stars, at the end of the
third chapter which deals with the determination of the directions,
Place and time. Itmay be pointed out that the conjunction of the
Planets with the stars is usually treated at the end in the other Hindu
works including the author’s smaller work, Laghu-Bhaskariya, The
topic of the lunar eclipse is usually taken up before the solar eclipse.
But the author of the Maha-Bhaskariya, following Aryabhata I, has
Teversed this order too. It seems that he has been misled by the
Change of order in the Aryabhatiya, for he has prescribed the use of

--- Page 44 ---
al INFRODUCTION

parallax in the case of the lunar eclipse also. In the Laghu-Bhaskariya,
however, he has corrected himself.

The arrangement of the subject-matter followed in the Maha-
Bhaskariya thus forms a unique feature of that work.

5:3. Language, metres and technical terms

The language of the Maha-Bhaskariya is simple and is meant
to be easily understandable. The author aims at clarity rather than at
conciseness and brevity. The style of expression is simple but varied.
The subject matter is sometimes introduced in the old style, like,

aatat weaaaer faa aevaeaa i (v. 8)

sometimes like,

aleaay veut areanraratanetiaas i (v. 1)
and sometimes without any introductory remark. The astronomical
rules are stated in numerous ways. For example,
(i) Using potential mood (vidhilin), as in:
emerata: weit Bal Freie. feat: |
fauataa aera Re aera TASTAT 11 (iv. 31)

(ii) Using imperative mood (/of), as in :

ufaad far faamwgyae |
arafaarea anna fart ufsaeaa ui (i. 40)

(iii) Using causative and other moods (nic, etc.), as in :
aqeyuey faery
BEAT AANCIMA: ETAT Wy (i. 20)

The subject matter is garbed in a variety of metres: anustubh,
arya, indravajra, malabharim, malim, praharsini, rathoddhata,
fardulavikridita, sragdhara, syenika, svagata, vasantatilaka and yamn-
fastha, Whenever lengthy metres have been used it is found that words
and phrases used as fillers have been necessary to fit in the metre.
Such words and phrases are one or more of the following:

(i) sada, sarvada, nityam, nityaSah, Gu, etc.

(ii) a@huh, vadanti, pravadanti, varnayanti, usanti, iti kirtitah
sadbhih, ganakair nirupyate, guruprasadat pratibuddha-
buddhibhih, yvyavarnayanti  ganak@ — bhatasastracittah,
ucyate kramena taj jtatacaranicayaih sada budhaih, etc.

--- Page 45 ---
BHASKARA’S WORKS xli

Sometimes lengthy substitutes have been used for ordinary
words to suit the metre. For example: mahibhujam sukendranamnam
gatavarsasangraham for sakayarsa, tribhayanasya gunapratanam and
vyasakh ndanicayah for trijya, etc.

At places, the author has indulged in poetic fancies Thus, for
example, instead of saying ‘moon’ in plain words, he writes— “the
moon, who is the mirror for the faces of the directions and who exhibits
all excellent phases and whose round body looks like the face of a
damsel and is marked by the figure of a hare.” Similarly, he describes
the motion of the shadow-tip of the gnomon as follows: ‘The shadow
(of the gnomon) moves like a spellbound serpent with its head (i. e.,
tip) kept upon the periphery of that cicle.”

Amongst the defects of composition may be pointed out the
following :

(i) Inexactness of expression, as in i. 30, latter half. (ii) Bad
sequence, as in 113-19. (iii) Truncation of rule, as ini. 32. (iv) Ob-
scurity, as ini. 44 (last line), i. 52 (last line), and iv. 58-63.

Of the technical terms used in the Maha-Bhaskariya, the
following are unusual and deserve mention :
» apama (declination). The usual term is apakrama.
apagams (declination).
avanati (meridian zenith distance).
avanaima (meridian zenith distance).
kastha (arc, direction).
kilaka (the Rsine of the altitude).
kilakagra (=$ankvagra). The word kilaka (meaning a

post or pillar) has been used as a synonym of sanku,
(gnomon).

kotisadhana (=koftiphala).

ee

9. khanda (half), as in golokhanda (the semi-diameter of a

sphere) and dyuvyasa-khanda (the semi-diameter of the
diurnal circle).

10. pronnati (altitude).
11. bheda (half), as in:

gola-bheda (the semj-diameter of a sphere).
.A. Bh. 6

--- Page 46 ---
xiii INTRODUCTION

diyasa-vistara-bheda (the semi-diameter of the diurnal
circle).
dyuvyasa-bheda (the semi-diameter of the diurnal circle).
viskambha-bheda (semi-diameter).

12. madhyajatalambaka (the Rsine of the altitude of meridian-
ecliptic point).

13. madhya-parinisthita-lambaka (the Rsine of the altitude of the
meridian-ecliptic point.

14. maurika (minute of arc).

15. vi (celestial latitude). The usual term is viksepa.

16. vimaurika (second of arc).

17, velakufta (time-pulveriser).

18. samnati (meridian zenith distance).

Most of the above terms’ could be explained from Sanskrit
grammar, or on the basis of the known words from which they have
been derived, but the formation of some of them, such as maurika
and vimaurika, is not clear. The word kastha is used in the sense of
‘an arc’ (particularly, ‘element of an arc measuring 225”) and also in
the sense of ‘direction’. The usual word is kastha. Such deviation is
noticed also in the case of non-technical terms. For example, s/aka has
been used for salaka (needle). This has been done deliberately to suit
metrical requirements. It is interesting to note that the term vi, used to
mean ‘celestial latitude’, is a tachygraphic abbreviation of the usual term
viksepa. .

Numbers have been expressed exclusively by means of words.
Two words, tithi and salin, used to denote 30 and I, respectively,
deserve special notice. The former is usually taken to denote 15, and
the latter is used in that sense in the M aha-Bhaskariya only.

The word jyau, used as a synonym of Jupiter, is probably
derived from the Greek word Zeus.

5-4. Special features of M/Bh

Amongst the important features of the Maha-Bhaskariya which
deserve the special notice of the historian, mention may be made of
the following :

. 1. Application of indeterminate equations of the first degree to
problems in astronomy. (MBh, i. 41-52).

--- Page 47 ---
BHASKARA'S WORKS hii

Use of a special rule for finding the sine of an are (or
angle), greater than 90°. (MBA, iv. 2).

This rule was earlier used in the Aryabhatiya (iii. 22),
but it was not explicitly stated there. W.E. Clark has,
therefore, missed the exact significance of Aryabhata I's
rule, although his interpretation is mathematically correct.

Statement of an approximate formula for calculating the
sine (or cosine) of a given arc (or angle) without the use
ofa table. (MBA, vii. 17-19).

This formula occurs in the Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta of
his contemporary Brahmagupta also and seems to have been
well known in the time of Bhaskara I.

Calculation of the mean longitudes of the planets by the
method of the pratyabda-suddhi. (MBA, i. 21-39).

Discussion of planetary motion with the help of both
epicyclic and eccentric theories. (MBA, ch. v.).

The Maha-Bhaskariya is the only available work on
Hindu astronomy which explains in detail the motion of the
planets with the help of the epicyclic theory and also with
the help of the eccentric theory. Many details of the
eccentric theory given by Bhiaskara I are quite new.

The methods of finding the distances of the Sun and
Moon and of the planets are specially interesting. According
to Bhaskara I, the manda-karna should be determined by the
process of iteration and the sighra-karna by applying the
rule only once.

Calculation of eclipses by the method of ten Rsines (dasajya-
vidhana). (MBA, ch. v.).

The method of ten Rsines was used in the earlier works
on Hindu astronomy but was later replaced by better
methods. The Maha-Bhaskariya isthe only available text
where this method is found to occur. :

The method was criticised by Brahmagupta, who wrote :
“Since the Jambana, in ghatis or minutes, as determined by
the method of ten Rsines from the dreggatis of the Sun and
the Moon is not equal to its correct value, therefore the
Jambana calculated by the rule of ten Rsines is gross.”
(BrSpSi, xi. 28).

--- Page 48 ---
xliy INTRODUCTION

Bhaskara I has rightly discarded the method in his
Laghu- Bhaskariya.

7. Application of parallax in the calculation of the lunar
eclipse. (MBh, v. 68-70).

In the Maha-Bhaskariya, Bhaskara I prescribes the
same method for calculating a lunar eclipse as for calcu-
lating a solar eclipse and makes use of parallax in both the
eclipses. Inthe case of a lunar eclipse, he even prefers
his method to those of others who did not make use of
parallax. He believed that their methods were approximate
For, he says:

“Others give instruction in the lunar eclipse without
the use of (the ten) Rsines, because it causes little difference
in the result.” (MBA, v. 74).

Evidently, he was unaware of the real difference bet-
ween the two kinds of eclipses. But by the time of writing
his smaller work, the Laghu-Bhaskariya, he seems to have
recognized his mistake, as in that work he has given
different methods for the calculation of the eclipses of the
Sun and the Moon, making use of parallax in the case of
the solar eclipse only. He has also treated the eclipses of
the Sun and the Moon in two different chapters.

8. Statement of the correct method for the illuminated part
of the Moon. (MBA, vi. 5-7).

The method for calculating the illuminated part of the
Moon’s disc is incorrectly stated in the Sarya-siddhanta. So
E. Burgess has made the following remark : “It is not to be
wondered at that the Hindus did not recognize the
ellipticity of the line forming the inner boundary of the
Moon’s illuminated part: it is more strange that they
ignored the obvious fact that, while the illuminated portion
of the Moon’s spherical surface visible from the earth
varies very nearly as her distance from the Sun, the
apparent breadth of the bright part of her disc, in which
that surface is seen projected, must vary rather as the versed
sine of her distance.’’t

——=

 

1. See E. Burgess, Translation of the Strya-siddhanta, notes
on S2Si, x, 9.

--- Page 49 ---
 

BHASKaRA’S WORKS rly

The rules prescribed by Bhaskara I are correct and do
not call for any criticism. :

9. Discussion of planetary conjunction in longitude. (A¢Bh,
vi. 5-7, 49-54).

In the Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta and other later works,
study is made of planetary conjunction along the secondary
to the prime vertical (samaprotiya-vrtta). Bhaskara J
deals with the conjunction of a planet with another planet
or of a planet with a star, in celestial longitude. It is
interesting to note in this connection that Brahmagupta!
criticises Aryabhata I for making a study of planetary
conjunction in celestial longitude, although there is no
reference to it in the Aryabhatiya.

10. Statement of the differing parameters and methods of the
“other tantra” of Aryabhata I which followed midnight
day-reckoning. (MBA, vii. 21-35).

55. Popularity of MBh

The Maha-Bhaskariya was regarded as an authoritative work on
Aryabhata I’s sunrise system. of astronomy (taught in the Aryabhotiya)
and was studied as a higher text-book on astronomy. A number of
commentaries were written on this work. The earliest and the most
famous commentary came from the pen of Govinda-svami, who him-
self read it as a text-book atthe feet of his teacher.2 The well-known
astronomer Paramegvara (1431 A.D.), who wrote commentaries on
the Aryabhatiya, the Surya-siddhanta, the Laghu-manasa of Maifijula-
(932 A. D.), and the Lilavati, etc., gave special preference to the
Maha-Bhaskariya by writing two illucidatory works dealing with it :

1. The Karma-dipika, which is a running commentary on the
Maha-Bhaskariya ; and
2. The Siddhanta-dipika, which is an illucidation of Govinda-
svami’s commentary on the Maha-Bhaskariya.
Other commentaries were written by Sankaranarayana (869
A.D.), Siiryadeva (b. 1191 A.D.) and Makkibhatta (1377 A.D.).

References to and quotations from the Maha-Bhaskariya occur
in the works of Sankarandrayana (869 A.D.), Udayadivakara (1073

 

 

1. See BrSpSi, ix. 11-12.

2. See supra, p. xxxv.

--- Page 50 ---
alvi INTRODUCTION

A.D.), Siiryadeva (b. 1191 A-D.), Makkibhatta (1377 A.D.), Param-
e$vara (1431 A.D.), and Nilakantha (1500 A.D.). Quotations from the
Maha-Bhaskariya are found to occur also in Visnu Sarma’s commentary
(c. 1363 A.D.) on the Vidya-Mddhaviya and in a commentary, entitled
Dasadhyayt, by Govinda Bhatta (1237-95 A.D.) on the Brhajjataka of
Varahamihira (d. 587 A.D.).

A calendrical work known as Vakya-karana was written about
A.D. 1300, on the basis of the Maha-Bhaskariya. This fact has been
openly acknowledged by its author in the invocatory stanza :

“Having bowed to the lotus-eyed effulgence (mohah), situated
at Kari-gaila (i.e., Hasti-Saila), 1 write this small work on
. astronomy on the basis of the Bhaskariya.”

The Vakya-karapa was commented upon by Sundararaja about 1500
A.D.

6. LAGHU-BHASKARIYA

The Laghu-Bhaskariya is a revised and abridged edition of the
Maha-Bhaskariya, and was written for younger and immature students
of astronomy, as the author himself says in the concluding stanza of
that work. Like the Maha-Bhaskariya, this work also is a tantra and
reckons the day from sunrise.

61. Contents of the Laghu-Bhaskariya

The contents of the Laghu-Bhaskariya are arranged in eight
chapters as follows : ‘

Ch. 1. Calculation of the mean longitudes.

Ch. 2. Calculation of the true longitudes. The paficanga.

Ch. 3. Directions, place and time.

Ch. 4. Eclipse of the Moon.

Ch. 5. Eclipse of the Sun.

Ch. 6. Heliacal visibility and phases of the Moon, elevation of
the Moon’s horns, and moonrise.

Ch. 7.- Heliacal visibility and conjunction, in longitude, of the
star-planets (Mars, etc.).

Ch. 8. Conjunction of planets with stars.

The contents of the Laghu-Bhaskariya justify the claim of that
work of being an abridged edition of the author’s larger work, the
Maha-Bhaskariya. It would be more correct to call it a well-planned
summary of the important rules and processes contained in the Maha-
Bhaskariya. The indeterminate analysis of the first degree, the

--- Page 51 ---
BHASKARA’S WORKS alvii

eccentric theory of planetary motion, and several alternative rules and
processes occurring in the Maha-Bhaskariya, whose inclusion in a
smallar work like the Laghu-Bhaskariya was unnecessary, have been
omitted. There are, however, certain aspects of fundamental impor-
tance which have been specially emphasised in the Laghu-Bhaskariya.
For example, more than necessary space has been allotted to the
longitude correction and to the determination of the local longitude.
Some of the methods given in the Maha-Bhaskariya have been adopted
in the Laghu-Bhaskariya after revision and simplification. For example,
the rule given in MBA, iii. 37-38, which is defective, has been correctly
stated in LBA, iii. 21-23. Similarly, the method of ten Rsines (dasa-
jya-vidhana) for calculating parallax in a solar eclipse has been
replaced by the method of five Rsines (paiica-jya-vidhana). More-
over, the author has not made use of parallax in calculating the lunar
eclipse, which is a contradiction of what he did in the Maha-Bhas-
kariya but which is an improvement.

The arrangement of the topics in the Laghu-Bhaskariya is
judicious and in general agreement with that found in the other works
on Hindu astronomy.

The language used in the Laghu-Bhaskariya is simple, clear and
more concise than that used in the Mahda-Bhaskariya. There is
absence of unnecessary words and phrases and at no place is the
author lost in poetic fancies. Lengthy metres have been avoided, and,
excepting for two verses (17-18) in the last chapter, which are in
Sardulavikridita and sragdhara metres respectively, the whole of the
Laghu-Bhaskariya is composed in the anustubh metre.

6°2. Notable features

The most noteworthy features of the Laghu-Bhaskariya are the
two astronomical problems set in verses 17 and 18 of the eighth
chapter. The problem set in verse 17 involves the knowledge of the
integral solution of the following multiple equations :

x+y =a square number
x—Yy =a square number
xy+1 =a square number.

The problem set in verse 18 involves the knowledge of the integral
solution of the under mentioned simultaneous equations :

&x+1l = y®
Tyit+tl = 2

--- Page 52 ---
xiviii INTRODUCTION

Similar problems are found to occur also in Brahmagupta’s
Brahma-s phuta-siddhtnta, which was written about the same time.
Brahmagupta has stated the general solution of the above multiple
equations and also a method for solving the equation

Nx? +1 = y?,

The occurrence of the above-mentioned problems in the two
works written independently about the same time gives us an idea of

the development of Hindu algebra in the first half of the seventh
century A.D.

63. Popularity of LBh

The Laghu-Bhaskariya proved to be an excellent text-book for:
beginners in astronomy on account of its conciseness, clear and
simple expression and judicious arrangement. There are reasons to
believe that it was a popular work in Kerala, Cola, and the neighbour-
ing states including the Tamil-speaking ones. Numerous quotations
of word-chronograms expressing astronomical parameters from this
work found in the annotative works of Siryadeva (b. 1191 A. D.)
indicate that he must have read this work in his school days. The
commentator Paramesvara (1431 A D.) himself admits to have read it

at the feet of his teacher. In the opening stanza of his commentary on
this work, he writes :

“The meaning of the (Laghu) Bhaskariya which I heard from

the mouth of my teacher is being briefly set forth for the benefit of the
dull-witted.”’

The Laghu-Bhaskariya has been quoted on a larger scale than
the Maha-Bhaskariya. These quotations are found not only in works
on astronomy and astrology but also in certain works dealing with
other subjects also. One such quotation occurs in Karavinda-svami’s
commentary on the Apastamba-sulb1-sutra. Passages from the Laghu-
Bhaskariya are also found to have been adopted verbatim in the
Kar.na-ratna of Deva (689 A. D.) and in the Tantra-sangraha of Nila-
kantha Somayaji (1500 A. D.).

Comméentaries on the Laghu-Bhaskariya wete written not only

in Sanskrit but also in provincial vernaculars, such as Malayalam,
attesting to its wide popularity.

7, ARYABHATIYA-BHASYA

As already stated, Bhaskara P's commentary on the Aryabhatiya
is in two parts which are given different names. The commentary on

--- Page 53 ---
ARYABHATIYA-BHASYA slix

‘the Dasagitika-sutra (which forms the first chapter of the Aryabhatiya)
is called Dasagitika-stitra-vyakhya ; and that on the remaining three
chapters, Aryabhata-tantra-bhasya. Evidently, Bhaskara I regarded
Dasagitika-satra and the Aryabhata-tantra (comprising of the Ganita-
pada, the Kalakriya-pada and the Gola-pada) as two different works.
He has actually referred to the Dasagitika-sitra as tantrantara or
sva-tantrantara in his Aryabhota-tontra-bhosya. Other commentators
of the Aryabhatiya, too, seem. to be of the same view. The com-
mentator Stryadeva (b. 1191 A.D.) has called the Dasagitika-sttra
and the Aryabhata-tantra as two different compositions. The commen-
tator Raghunatha-raja (1597 A.D.) has also made similar statements.
The commentators Yallaya (1480 A.D.) and Nilakantha (1500 A.D.)
have commented upon the second, third and fourth chapters of the
Aryabhatiya only, which shows that they regarded these chapters’ as
forming a distinct work.

71. Nature of A. Bhasya

In the Dasagitika-sitra-vyakhya, the commentary on each sutra
comprises ::
(i) An introductory sentence indicating in brief the subject-
matter treated in the sutra.
(ti) Statement of the saera.
(ii) Separation of words occurring in the sara (pada-ccheda).
(iv) Interpretation of the text and exposition of the contents.

In the Aryabhata-tantra-bhasya, the separation of the words is
omitted but the sequential arrangement and the general tone of the
Commentary is the same as in the Dasagitika-stutra-vyakhya.

The commentary, taken as a whole, contains a detailed and
exhaustive discussion of the text and its contents. The text is explained,
4s usual, in accordance with the words used. Compound words are
disjoined or expounded in all possible ways and synonyms given, and
where necessary, grammatical peculiarities are explained. Rules of
mathematics are illustrated by giving one or more solved examples ; and
astronomical principles and processes indicated in the text are deve-
Joped and clarified. In order to make the subject-matter more clear and
interesting, doubts are raised, questions and cross-questions are put
forward, and appropriate answers are given. Where necessary, other
Televant topics are introduced and discussed. In matters of controversy,
all shades of opinion are set forth and an endeavour is made to
establish the superiority of Aryabhata I’s views and doctrines. In
A. Bh. 7

--- Page 54 ---
 

al INTRODUCTION

support of the statements made and arguments advanced, mathematical
and non-mathematical literature is freely quoted and, at places,
traditional authority is also cited. The commentator has sometimes
read inthe text more than what was intended by the author. For
example, giyinasa kuvayukaksyantya (in A, i.11) has, according to him,
reference to the determination of the sine without the use of the
gine-difference table, simply because the number 40500 used in
that determination is 12 times 3375 (giyinasa).

Besides giving a detailed exposition of the text and the contents
of the Aryabhatiya, the commentator has introduced and discussed
topics which are cither omitted or not expressly stated in the
Aryabhetiya. Thus, towards the end of his commentary on the
Ralakriya-pada, he deals with the planetary corrections, such as
(i) correction due to the longitude of the local place (desaintara-sams-
kara), (ii) correction for the equation of the centre due to the
eccentricity of the ecliptic (bhujantara-sainskar.), and (iii) correction
due to the Sun’s ascensional difference (cara-samskara), and with the
elements of the Hindu p sicanga, the tithi and the naksatra, Similarly,
in his commentary on the Gola-pada, he deals with the problems of the
Moon, such as (i) the phases of the Moon, (ii) rising of the Moon,
and (iii) graphical representation of the elevation of the Moon's horns.

72. Scope of A. Bhasya

Bhaskara I’s commentary on the Aryabhatiya, as its name
suggests, is of the vyakhya or bhasya type, and aims at a full exposition
of the text and the contents of the Aryabhatiya. “Those who want to
know everything written by Aryabhbata I,” writes Sankaranadrayana,
“should study the bhasya and the Brhat-karma-nibandha (of
Bhaskara 1).”?

7-3. Its language and style
The language used in the commentary is refined and scholarly,
but not difficult to comprehend. The commentary explains the text
word by word or phrase by phrase and, where necessary, gives
synonyms of technical terms and expounds compound words. The
subject-matter is discussed by raising questions and cross-questions
- and giving appropriate answers and providing illustrative examples,
where necessary. Earlier scholars are quoted either to substantiate the
views expressed in the text or to reject their views. Whatever topic is
touched upon is discussed thoroughly in all its aspects.

 

 

1. See Sankaranarayana’s comm. on LBA, viii. 19.

--- Page 55 ---
ARYABHATIY A-BHASYA hi

We give below some extracts from the commentary which will
give some idea of the style of the commentary. The topics have been
selected so as to be of interest to the reader.

(1). Sphericity of the Earth and the planets. (p. 250)

“Question : How are these planets etc. proved to be spherical in
shape. Others consider the Earth to be like a cart! or like a circular
mirror.?

Answer: This isnot so. The Earth has been proved to be
spherical, That 1 shall explain later.

Question : How are the planets proved to be spherical when the
Sun and the Moon look like flat circular mirrors and so (appear) the
other planets as well. ...

Answer + These planets etc., though spherical in shape, look like
circular mirrors because they are situated at a great distance. ... In
fact, they must be spherical, otherwise the increase and decrease of the
lunar phases would not be accounted for with a flat circular shape.
It proves that they are spherical in shape. So also has been said :

‘The Sun is a globe of fire, the Moon a globe of water, undefiled
and pure by its very nature.’ ”

(2) Position of the Earthin space. (p. 258)
“Question: How is the Earth situated in the sky without
support ?

Answer : Because of the predominance of the inherent property
(of holding itself ). Just as water, fire and wind are endowed with the
properties of wetness, burning, and blowing, respectively, and there is
nothing else to excite or instigate them to get wet, burn or blow, in the
same way, this Earth is also endowed with the property of holding itself
and not of being held (by something else).

Question: Or, is the Earth in the state of going down? They?
say, ‘It is falling downwards’.

Answer: Now, (let us first see) what is that called ‘downwards’.
Just as the Earth is ‘downwards’ with reference to us, in the same way,
we have to see what is ‘downwards’ in relation to the Earth. The word

 

 

 

1. We do not know who held this view.

2. This is the conception of the Jainas.

3. The reference is to the Jainas. The Buddhists also held this
view. See SiSi, Goladhyaya, iii. 9.

--- Page 56 ---
th INTRODUCTION

‘downwards’ denotes a direction, and the directions are known from.
the way they are defined. Thus the east is where the Sun rises, and
west where the Sun sets. ... Similarly, ‘downwards’ and ‘upwards’ are
defined with respect to the Earth. For the Earth (itself), nothing is
upwards and nothing downwards, so there is absence of its falling down.
Similarly, the sea which lies surrounding half the earth is also not
falling. Had the Earth been falling, clods of earth, arrows, etc.,
thrown aloft in the sky, would not overtake the Earth. ... Now, some
others think that the Earth is being supported by the (serpent) Sesa
or others. That, too, is inappropriate. For, then we will certainly
have to assume some support for Sesa etc. and some for these supports,
and there will be no end to it. If it is maintained that they stand by
their own power, why not assume the same power for the Earth.”

(3) Determination of the Earth’s diameter. (pp. 29-30)

“The Earth’s diameter may also be obtained by calculation as
follows: Ina solar eclipse, the true tithi for the time of apparent con-
junction of the Sun and Moon is indeed obtained in the eastern and

- western halves of the celestial sphere. There (in order to get the true
tithi for the time of sunrise or sunset) four ghatis' are added to or
subtracted from the mean fithi (‘time of geocentric conjunction of the
Sun and Moon’). At that time (of sunrise or sunset), the Rsine of the
zenith distance (of the Sun or Moon) is equal to the radius (i.e., 3438’),
the mean parallax of the Sun is 3’56’,. and the mean parallax of the
Moon is 52} minutes of arc. By the method of inversion, multiplying
the distance of the Sun or Moon, in yojanas, by its own parallax
and dividing by the Rsine of its zenith distance, which is equal
to the radius (i.e., 3438’), is obtained the semi-diameter of the Earth.
Twice of that is the Earth’s diameter.”

That is to say,

4s _. 2PxD.

Earth's diameter == — 3438" °

where P = the mean (horizontal) parallax of the Sun (Moon) in
minutes, and D = the distance of the Sun (Moon).”

(4) Characteristic feature of the yuga (planetary cycle). (p. 200)

“Now, what is the characteristic feature of a yuga? This is
being explained. The time which a planet, starting from the junction of
Pisces and Aries at half sunrise at Lanka on the first tithi in the light
half of Caitra, takes in returning to the junction of Pisces and Aries at

 

 

1. One ghatt = 24 minutes.

--- Page 57 ---
AR YABHATIYA-BHASYA . Liti.

half sunrise on the first sithi in the light half of Caitra is called its yuga
(cycle). So has been said :

‘The yuga (cycle of a planet) is the time by which the planet,
starting from (the junction of ) the first point of Aries and the
last point of Pisces at half sunrise at the equator (i.e, Lanka)
in the beginning of the light half of Caitra, comes back to the
same position again’.

The yugas with different end-points (periods) are reduced to the same
end-points (i.e., the same common period) by the theory of the in-
determinate analysis of the first degree.”

This passage is of interest, as it shows that the planetary cycle
of 4320000 years was determined by the theory of the indeterminate
analysis of the first degree. ‘

7-4, References in the Aryabhatiya-bhasya

TAL. Mathematicians Maskari, Parana, Mudgala and Pitana

At two places in the commentary, Bhaskara TI refers to the
mathematicians Maskari, Ptrana, Mudgala, and Putana and their
works. In commentary on A, i.1 (pp. 6-7), he writes :

“In the Ganita-pada, the Acarya (i.e, Acarya Aryabhata) has
dealt with the subject of mathematics (ganita) by indications
only, whereas in the Kdlakriya-pada and Gola-pada he has
dealt with ‘reckoning of time’ and ‘spherical astronomy’ in
(greater) detail. So, by the word ‘ganifa’ (used by Acarya
Aryabhata I) one must understand ‘a bit of mathematics’.
Otherwise, the subject of mathematics is vast. There are eight
vyavaharas (determinations), viz., misraka (mixture), sredhi
(series), kKsetra (plane figures), khdta (excavations), citi (piles
of bricks, etc.), krakacika (saw problems), rasi (heaps of grain)
and chaya (shadow). The misraka is that which involves the
mixture of several things. The fredhi is that which has a
beginning (i.e., a first term) and an increase (i.¢., common
difference). The ksefra tells us how to calculate the area of a
figure having several edges (or sides). The kha@ta enables us to
know the volumes of excavations. The citi tells us the measure
of a pile in terms of bricks. The krakacika: the krakaca
(saw) is a tool which saws timber; that which tells the
measure of the timber sawn is called krakacika (vyavahara).
The rasi tells us the measure of a heap of grain, etc. The
chaya is that which tells time from the measure of the shadow

--- Page 58 ---
liv INTRODUCTION

of the gnomon etc. Of the vyavahara-ganita (practical or
commercial mathematics, or Pati ganita), which is thus of eight
classes, there are four bijas (methods of analysis), viz., first,
second, third and fourth, i.¢., yavatfavat (theory of the simple
equation), yargavarga (theory of the quadratic equation), ghana-
ghana (theory of the cubic equations) and visama (theory of
equations involving several unknowns). Rules and examples
pertaining to each one of these have been compiled (in inde-
pendent works) by the masters Maskari, Purana, Mudgala, and
others. How can that be stated by the Acarya (i.e., Acarya
Aryabhata I) in a small work (the Aryabhatiya)? So we have

2

rightly said ‘a bit of mathematics’.

Discussing the rule in A, ii. 9 (p. 67), he argues :

“Doubt : If the areas of all the (plane) figures can be determined
by this rule, then the statement of the previously stated rules
would become useless ?

Answer: That is not useless. Both the verification and the
calculation of the areas are taught by this rule. The areas of
the previously stated figures have to be verified. The mathe-
maticians Maskari, Purana and Putana etc. prescribe the veri-
fication of all (plane) figures (by deforming them) into a
rectangular figure. So has it been said:

‘Having determined the area in accordance with the pres-
cribed rule, verification should aways be made by (deforming
the figure into) a rectangle, because it is the rectangle only
of which the area is obvious.’ ”

The above references show that in the time of Bhaskara I there
existed a number of text-books on mathematics (arithmetic, algebra
and mensuration). Of these, Bhaskara I mentions those which were
current in his time and were written by Maskari, Purana, Mudgala and
Piitana. These works were independent treatises on mathematics
and did not ‘contain astronomy. Later works on mathematics,
such as the Trigatika of Sridhara (c. 900 A.D.), and the Lilavati
and the Bijaganita of Bhaskara II (1150 A.D.), contain rules and
examples only. The works written by Maskari, Ptrana, etc., seem
to have contained, besides rules and examples, rules of verification
also. In the working of problems in the Bakhshali Manuscript,
we find that verification forms an indispensable part. Bhaskara I
has also sometimes verified his solutions. The arrangement of topics

--- Page 59 ---
ARYABHATIYA-BHASYA \y

followed in the works of Maskari, etc., appears to have been the same
as found in later works.t

The names Maskari and Purana occur in the manuscripts
together as Maskariptirana and it is difficult to say whether Maskari and
Purana are the names of two different persons or Maskari-Pirana is the
name of one and the same person. Maskari-Pirana as one name is
mentioned by Acarya Srutasagara Siri (1525 A.D.) in his commentary
on the Bodhaprabhrta (gatha 53) and the Bhavaprabhyta (gathas 84 and
135) of Acdrya Kunda-kunda (c. 450 A.D.).

742. Passages from mathematical works

Nineteen passages dealing with mathematics have been quoted,
fully or partly, from contemporary or anterior works. Of these,
fourteen are in Sanskrit and five in Prakyta gathas. From the Sanskrit
passages we learn that :

I. The mathematicians in the time of Bhaskara I, including
Bhaskara I also, regarded addition and subtraction as the
main operations of mathematics. To them multiplication
and involution were kinds of addition, and division and
evolution kinds of subtraction.

2. Works on arithmetic and mensuration (patiganita) studied
in the time of Bhaskara I were more or less of the same
pattern as the later works on the subject. Rules for squaring
and cubing a number and for simplifying the fraction
at+b/c, quoted by Bhaskara I, are similar to those found to
occur in the Ganita-sara-sangraha of Mahavira (850 A.D.)
and the Trisatika of Sridhara (c. 900 A.D.). The rule
quoted for a tusk-shaped plane figure is also similar to the
approximate rule prescribed for such a figure by Mahavira
(850 A.D.).

3. The area of a plane figure was, in those times always, verified
by transforming the figure into a rectangle. Aryabhata I,
too, has given a rule to this effect.

4. For finding the area of a circle and the volume of a sphere,
the following approximate formulae were used :

(i) area of a circle of radius r = 3r?,
(ii) volume of a sphere of radius r = 9r3/2.

 

1. Note the order in which the eight vyavaharas have been stated
by Bhaskara I in the first passage quoted above. This order is the
Same as found in the works of Brahmagupta and others.

--- Page 60 ---
ivi INTRODUCTION

Bhaskara I has quoted these rules to emphasise the approxi-
mate character of these rules and the accuracy of the rules
given by Aryabhata I. In the case of the volume of a sphere,
however, his judgment is not correct.

The: five passages in Prakrta gathas state the following for-
mulae :

1, circumference of a circle = 4/10d?,_
where ‘d’ is the diameter.

2, chord of segment of a circle = 4/4a (2r—a),
where ‘r’ is the radius of the circle and ‘a’ the arrow of the
arc of the segment.

3. Area of segment of a circle = 44/10. ac,

where ‘a’ is the arrow and ‘c’ the length of the bounding
chord.

4, rf &+ fi = V10(o @/10+ 4/8/10) .
5. a=(—b) = a+b.

Of these, the first four, which are based on w=./10, have been
criticised by Bhaskara I. The main target of his attack is the value of
a=./10, which was then regarded as the accurate value. Bhaskara I
has demonstrated that these formulae lead to inconsistent results.

The following formula, taken from some work written in
Sanskrit, is also criticised for the above reason :

6. arc of segment of a circle = /10 (c/44a]2)3,
where ‘a’ is the arrow of the arc and ‘c’ the bounding chord.

Bhaskara I concludes by saying : “Sol bow to 4/10 whose grace is
not well-conceived.”’
7-43. Astronomers and astronomical works

THE FIVE SIDDHANTAS

Bhaskara I mentions the names of the five well-known siddhantas,
(viz., Syayambhuva-siddhanta,’ Vasistha-siddhanta, Saurya-siddhanta?,
Romaka-siddhanta and Paulisa-siddhanta), and refers to a number of

 

 

 

1. The same as Paitamaha-siddhanta.

2. It is noteworthy that Bhaskara I spells Saura-siddhanta as
Saurya-siddhanta.

--- Page 61 ---
ARYABHATIYA-BHASYA ivii

works written on the basis of the Svayambhuva-siddhant a, which in the
time of Aryabhata I, he reports on the basis of traditional authority,
was honoured at Kusumapura in preference to the other four
siddhantas.

The most notable references, however, are to the followers of the
Remake-siddhanta, who have been designated as aviditaparamartha
romakah (‘the followers of the Romaka-siddhinta who do not know the
truth’)? At another place, however, they have been designated as
viditaparamarthah (‘who know the truth’). But this latter epithet is in
derision and is not to be taken literally. For, Bhaskara I writes :3

budhair eva viditaparamarthaih mukhamayasitam

i. eé., “the intelligent (Romakas), the knowers of the truth, have (only)
wearied their mouths,”

They are referred to on three occasions. The first reference
occurs in the commentary on the fifth verse of the Kalakri 'ya-pada in
connection with the motion of the solstices (ayana), The Romakas have
been represented as believers in that motion. The second reference,
too, occurs, under the same verse. Here we are told that what others
call savana-dina (‘civil. day or terrestrial day’) is termed ravyudaya
(‘rising of the sun or sunrise’) by the Romakas, The third reference
occurs under verse 10 of the Kalakriya-pada. Itis stated there that
the Romakas determine the position of the Sun by the method of
pratyabda-suddhi, and from the position of the Sun (thus obtained)
they derive the positions of the other planets,

Pratyabda-suddhi means the number of days lying between
the Caitradi (‘beginning of the month of Caitra’) and the varsadi
(‘beginning of mean solar year’). For finding the pratyabda-suddhi the
following two methods are stated :

(i) pratyabda-suddhi=(ahargana for Varsadi) —(ahargana for

Caitradi),
This pratyabda-suddhi is in terms of civil days.

(ii) Calculate the Sun’s mean longitude, in terms of revolutions,
from the ahargana corresponding to the Caitradi. Then reduce the

1. See comm. on A, ii. 1, p. 46.

2. See comm. on A, iii. 5, p. 183.

3. See comm. on A, iii 5, p. 189.

A348

--- Page 62 ---
(ili INTRODUCTION

part of the current revolution traversed or to be traversed, (whichever is
smaller), to degrees. These degrees give the pratyabda-suddhi in terms
of mean solar days.

The pratyabda-suddhi was used for finding the number of days
elapsed since the beginning of the current mean solar year (vargsadi).
These days were used to calculate the Sun’s mean longitude by the usual
proportion. In order to derive the mean longitudes of the other
planets, the Sun’s mean longitude. was reduced to degrees, those
degrees were added to 360 times the number of years elapsed since the
beginning of Kaliyuga, and the sum (denoting the number of mean
solar days elapsed since the beginning of Kaliyuga) was severally
multiplied by the motions of the individual planets per mean solar day.
Bhaskara I has stated the method for finding the positions of the
planets on the basis of the pratyebda-suddhi in a simplified form in
the Maha-Bhaskariya (i. 22-39). From a remark made in that work,!
we learn that Bhaskara I was the earliest disciple of Arya-
bhata I (belonging to the ASmaka school) to incorporate the method
of pratyabda-Suddhi in his system of astronomy. Obviously,
Bhaskara I was very much fascinated by that method. He has laid
special emphasis on it by devoting enough space inthe Muaha-
Bhaskariya. Hehas summarized that subject in his commentary on
the Aryabhatiya also?

References. to the teachings of the followers of the Romaka-
siddhanta are revealing. They point to the following conclusions :

(1) Like the author of the Sarya-siddhanta, the followers of the
Romaka-siddhanta also believed in the (oscillatory) motion
of the solstices. Ina stanza ascribed by BhaskaraI to the
Romakas, the solstice is stated to make 137 revolutions ina
period of 1894110 years moving to and fro from (the
beginning of the fourth quarter of the naksatra) Punarvasu
(having Aditi for its lord) to (the end of) the last naksatra
(Revati).

It is interesting to note that Visnucandra, author
of a redaction of the Vasistha-siddhanta, too, states the

1. MBh, i. 21. See supra, p. xxvi, quotation 5.
2. See comm, on 4, iii. 10, pp. 202-03.

--- Page 63 ---
ARYABHATIYA-BHASYA Vs

period of the solstitial motion as 1894110 years, and ascribes
it to the Brahma- and Surya- siddhantas2

This shows that in the time of Bhaskara I (628 A.D.)
the followers of the Romaka-siddhanta believed that the
solstice moved at the rate of about 47” per annum.

(2) The use of the term ravyudaya (‘sunrise’) in the sense of
‘civil day’ was a characteristic feature of the Romaka-
siddhanta,

A similar peculiarity of the Pulisa-siddhanta has been
noted by Bhattotpala (968 A.D.) in his commentary on the
Brhat-samhita of Varahamihira (d. 587 A.D.). Bhattotpala
writes that Pulisacarya (the author of the PuliSa-siddhanta)
used the term savana (‘civil’) in the sense of saura (‘solar’)
and vice versa?

(3) The pratyabda-Suddhi method of finding the mean longi-
tudes of the planets is a contribution of the Romaka-
siddhanta, or the followers of the Ron.aka-siddhanta.
Such a method occurs as an additional method in the
Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta, the Sisya-dhi-vrddhida and other
later works. If Bhaskara I is correct, then the method is due
to the Romaka-sidahanta or its followers.

Brahmagupta criticises the Romaka-siddhanta for not
using the system of kalpa, manvantara, and yuga, etc.3
It may be that the pratyabda-suddhi method was meant to
avoid these big time-divisions. Unfortunately, Bhaskara I
does not give the details of the pratyabda-suddhi method
actually used by the followers of the Romaka-siddhanta. If
Varahamihira is right,! then we must understand that the
Romaka-siddhanta did use yuga etc., but those yugas were

—-

 

1. The verse is
qem art farganamearseteca: (Rce¥ Lo) 1
waa at ad aaratfand Fer i

It has been ascribed to Visnucandra by Prthtidaka (860 A.D.) in his
commentary on BrSpSi, xi. 54. Also, see H.T. Colebrooke, Miscella-
neous Essays, Vol. II, p. 380.

2. See comm. on BrSam, ch. ii.
3. See BrSpSi, i. 13.
4. See PSi, i. 15.

--- Page 64 ---
ly, INTRODUCTION

not in conformity with those prescribed in the scriptures.
Hence the criticism of Brahmagupta against the Romaka-
Siddhanta. Butit is rather surprising that the rules for
obtaining the mean longitudes of the planets ascribed to the
Romaka-siddhanta by Varahamihirat do not conform to
the pratyabda-fuddhi method ascribed to that work by
Bhaskara I. It is probably on grounds of such differences
between Pafica-siddhantika of Varahamihira and the five
siddhantas (summarized therein) that the Persian scholar
Al-Birtini (973 A.D. to 1048 A.D.) remarks :

“Varahamihira bas composed an astronomical hand-
book of small compass called Pafica-siddhantika, which
ought to mean that it contains the pith and marrow of
the preceding five siddhantas. But this is not the case,
nor is it so much better than they as to be called the
correct one of the five. So the name does not indicate
anything but the fact the number of siddhantas is
five.’

We do not fully subscribe to the opinion of A!-Birtni. We feel
that Varahamihira has, as confessed by him, based his work on the five
siddhaéntas then known and available to him, but, being a writer of
a karana (calendrical work), he has summarized and abbreviated the
teachings of those siddhanras in his own way. He might have also taken
the liberty of deviating from the original works on certain minor points.

References by BhaskaraI to the followers of the Romaka-
siddhanta and to the methods used by them suggest that the Romaka-
siddianta was also used by a certain school of astronomers in the time
of Bhaskara I. But the commentary does not throw light on these
astronomers or their works. Brahmagupta has referred to Srisena
and his redaction of the Romaka-siddhanta® In the commentary of
Bhaskara I there is no reference to either Srisena or his work. It is,
however, noteworthy that the verse :

agaarfeaiataad gam aq: |
qreaatfent get at afg vafaat

meaning : ‘The sages of ancient times remarked that the winter
solstice and the summer solstice occurred at the beginning of
1. See PSi, ch. viii.
2. See Al-Birtini’s Jndia, vol. 1, p. 153.
3. See BrSpSi, xi. 50.

 

--- Page 65 ---
ARYABHATIY A-BHASYA Ixi

Dhanistha and the middle of Aélesa (respectively). But now
they are seen to occur at the beginning of Capricorn and
Cancer (respectively). How can it be so unless they have
motion ?”
which Bhaskara I ascribes to the followers of the Romaka-siddhanta,
has been attributed by Nilakantha (1500 A.D.) to Prabhakara
Tf Nilakantha is right, then we must infer that Acarya Prabhakara,
whom Bhaskara I has criticised by name cn two occasions in the
commentary, was a follower of the Romaka-siddhanta?

No special reference has been made to the Paulisa, Vasistha and
Saurya Siddhantas. There are, however, anonymous references to
several doctrines prevailing in those days. Should the old versions of
of the five giddhantas be available, it might perhaps be possible to
assign the different teachings to them.

2. LATADEVA

Of the authors of works on astronomy quoted in the commentary,
Latadeva is the most important. BhaskaraI has called him ‘Acarya
Latadeva’ (Learned Latadeva)® and ‘Sarva-siddhanta-guru Acarya
Latadeva’ (Learned Latadeva, teacher of, or well versed in, all systems
of astronomy). The appellations acarya and sarva-siddhanta-guru
suggest that Latadeva had earned a name as a great scholar and teacher
of astronomy.

In the commentary, there are altogether three references to
Acarya Latadeva. In the first reference,5 he is stated to have written
that “the winter solstice occurs (when the Sun is) at the beginning of
Capricorn, and the summer solstice (when the Sun is) at the beginning
of Cancer’, and further that “the durations of the seasons $igira
(winter), vasanta (spring), grisima (summer), ghanagama (rainy season),
Sarada (autumn), and himagama (beginning of winter) are respectively
equivalent to the times of the Sun’s stay in the successive pairs
of signs beginning with Capricorn. In the second reference,®
Latadeva is said to have defined the solar, civil, and sidereal units of
time with reference to true velocity. The third reference? shows that

—_

 

 

See Nilakantha’s comm. on A, iii. 9.

It seems to us that whether Bhaskara I criticises Prabhakara
or the Romakas, his target of attack is always Prabhakara.

1.
2
oO
3-4. See comm. on A, iii. 5, pp. 189, 183.
5. Comm. on A, iii. 5, p. 183, 184.
6. Comm. on A. iii, 5, p. 189, 187.
7. Comm. on A, iii. 10. p. 202.

--- Page 66 ---
Ixii INTRODUCTION

Latadeva, along with Panduranga-svami and Nisanku, etc., was a direct
pupil of Aryabhata I. Interpreting verse 10 of the Kalakriyd-pada,
Bhaskara I writes ;

“sastyabdanam sasti, means ‘sixty times sixty years’; yada
vyatitah : yada means ‘at which time’, vyatitdh means ‘had
elapsed’; trayas ca yugapadah: yugapadah means “quarters
of a yuga’ (or quarter pugas), when three of them had
elapsed: tryadhika vitnsatir abdah means ‘twenty years as
increased by three’; fada means ‘at that time’; mama
janmanah atitah (had elapsed since my birth). (That is, when
sixty times sixty years and three quarter yugas had elapsed
since the beginning of the current yuga, at that time twenty-
three years had elapsed since my birth). This very thing was
told to Panduranga-svami, Latadeva, and Nisanku, etc., by
Acarya Aryabhata, while lecturing on the ‘astra (ie.,
Aryabhatiya).’!

Latadeva is mentioned in the Paiica-siddhantika (i. 3 ; xv. 18), the
Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta (xi. 46, 48), Prthidaka’s commentary on
the Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta (xxi. 3, 5, 6,8), the Siddhanta-Sekhara
(ii. 10), Udayadivakara’s commentary on the Laghu-Bhaskariya
(v. 12), and in Makkibhatta’s commentary on the Siddhanta-sekhara
(ii. 10). Varahamihira (d. 587 A.D.) ascribes to him the authorship
of two commentaries, one on the Romaka-siddhanta and the other on
the Pauli§a-siddhanta2 “According to the teachings of Latacarya,”
says Varahamihira, “the ahargaya is to be reckoned from sunset at
Yavanapura (Alexandria) (PSi, xv. 18). Here Varahamihira is probably
referring to Latadeva’s edition of the Romaka-siddhanta. According
to Sripati (1039 A.D.),8 Latadeva was also the author of at least
one more work on astronomy, which was a tantra (or siddhdnta) and
in which the day was reckoned from midnight. Al-Birtini ascribes to

 

 

 

1. The last sentence, in the manuscripts is defective, and can
be interpreted also to mean :

“This very thing was told to Latadeva and NiSanku, etc., by
Panduranga-svami, while lecturing on the Aryabhata-sastra
(ie., Aryabhatiya),” or “This very thing was told to Niéanku,
etc., by Pdnduranga-svami Latadeva, while lecturing on the
Aryabhata-sastra,”’

2. See PSi, i. 3.

3. See SiSe, ii. 10.

--- Page 67 ---
ARYABHATIYA-BHASYA {xiii

him the authorship of the Surya-siddhanta.1 It is probable that
Latadeva’s work on astronomy with midnight day-reckoning was a
recast of the Surya-siddhanta.

The following verses ascribed to Latacarya, Ladhacarya or
Ladhadeva (Ladha=Lata)? by the commentator Prthtidaka, show
that the tantra written by Latadeva was composed in the arya metre —
and that it was very much similar, both in language and style, to the
Aryabhatiya of Aryabhata I :

1. fafama: aaaa: & fea facsfa anetacaqz: |

aaa: aratat gars: wafer: i?
2. adandaad: gceezgraqerarted: |
afar: saragerafafea anaa: Faq: ut

3, grafts e fagafa qearaae: saferrcaraT |

wieeanta aeareratared gaetfag: ue

4. dacarudaaterpagna va qwaa qa: 1°
5. wenRaalemaan war adal fareaar 1
santa aTras a: UTed afeaTa 1

frat fafaraafecscdta Aa: sHeztaeq: |
Varfaga fassaqate satfatatsetad 11”

The verses ascribed to Latadeva by Bhaskara I, too, are in the
arya metre. It is probable that they are quoted from the same work of
Latadeva as cited by Prthudaka.

From the Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta,’ we learn that the work
of Latadeva was utilized by both Srisena and Visnucandra in preparing
their recasts of the Romaka-siddhanta and the Vasistha-siddhanta,
respectively. Bhaskara I, however, does not throw much light on the
works of Latadeva,

 

 

 

1. See India, I, p. 153. According to §.B. Diksita (Bharatiya-
Jyotisa-Sastra, p. 233), Latadeva’s SxS was different from that
summarized by Varahamihira.

Ladha is the Prakrta form of Lata.
Quoted under BrSpSi, xxi. 3.
Quoted under Br Sp Si, xxi. 3.
Quoted under BrSpSi, xxi. 6.
Quoted under BrSpSi, xxi. 8.
Quoted under BrSpSi, xxi. 5.

xi. 48.

MAM PR wD

=

--- Page 68 ---
tsiv INTRODUCTION

Of the time and place of Acarya Latadeva, little is definitely
known. According to G. Thibaut, the year 505 A.D. mentioned in
PSi (i. 8), indicates the time of Latadeva.! The names Lata, Latacarya
or Ladhacarya, and Latadeva or Ladhadeva by which Acarya Latadeva
has been referred to by later writers probably suggest that he
belonged to Latadega or Ladhadega (southern Gujarat).

3 PRABHAKARA

Acarya Prabhakara has been referred to twice in the commen-
tary, both in connection with the textual interpretation of the
Aryabhatiya. The first reference occurs in the commentary on verse
11 of the Ganita-padu, where, commenting on the word samavrtta-
paridhipadah, Bhaskara I observes :

“That (plane) figure whose periphery is a perfect circle is
samavrttaparidhif ; one-fourth of that is samavrtta-paridhi-
padah, If this be the interpretation, then (by samavrtta-
paridhipadah) we are to understand a certain area (which is
wrong). Acdarya Prabhakara has given this very interpretation
(4it., has expounded the compound word samavrttaparidhipadah
in this very manner). He is a teacher (guru), bethinking thus,
Iam not censuring him. Moreover, it is correct to say that
there exists an arc which isequal to its Rsine; it is known
even to one who is ignorant of the science (of mathematics).
But the very same (Acarya) has criticised the equality of
arc and Rsine. I, however, assert that there does exist
equality of arc and Rsine. If there were no equality of arc
and Rsine, then an iron ball could not rest on level ground.
I, therefore, infer that there is some portion of the iron ball
which remains in contact with level ground. That part is one-
ninetysixth of the whole circumference. Equivalence of arc
and Rsine has been recognized by other scholars (acaryaih)
also (who have said) :

‘Due to the sphericity of its body, a sphere touches the
Earth by one-hundredth part of its circumference.”? ”

1. See G. Thibaut’s Introduction to his edition of the Pafica-
siddhantika, p. xxx. According to §.B. Diksita, Sudhakara Dvivedi and
Al-Birani, the year 505 A.D. mentioned in PSi, i. 8 indicates the time
of writing the PSi.

2. Cf. SiDVz, Goladhyaya, vii. 35 (a-b); SiSi, Goladhyaya,
iii. 13.

 

--- Page 69 ---
ARYABHATIY A-BHASYA Ixy

(The correct interpretation of samayrttaparidhipadah is the
following) : The periphery (of a plane figure) which is a
perfect circle, is samavyttaparidhih ; one-fourth of the sama-
wrttaparidhih is samayvrttaparidhipadah.”’

The second reference occurs in the commentary on verse 12
(pp. 84-85) of the same chapter. Having explained that verse,
Bhaskara I adds :

“This interpretation too is the one given by Acarya Prabhakara,
It is improper and meaningless to interpret the text without
pointing out its defect. How is it meaningless ? In this science
of mathematics, an alternative stitra is introduced to give a
shorter or an alternative method. There isnot even a scent
of either of the two. How? Because the process contemplated
here proceeds with the help of the first and the second
Rsines determined from the geometrical method described
in the previous arya. And two rules being involved here, the
process isnot shorter. Moreover, being dependent on the
preceding rule, the method is not alternative too. So, no
purpose is served by this rule. How can, then, the various
Rsine-differences be obtained severally? This is a silly
question. For, they may be derived from the Rsines (them-
selves). The Rsines of one, two, three, and more elemental
arcs have already been determined (by the geometrical
method). Subtracting one from the next, the Rsine-differences
are easily obtained. Even one ignorant of mathematics knows
this, not to say of an astronomer. However, it is being
shown for the comprehension of the duli-witted.”

The above references suggest that Acarya Prabhakara was an
earlier commentator of the Aryabhatiya. Such an assumption is not
impossible, for Bhaskara II (1150 A.D.), in his commentary on the
Sisya-dhi-vrddhida’ of Lalla, calls Prabhakara ‘a disciple (follower) of
Aryabhata I.’ The word guru used by Bhaskara I for Acarya Prabha-
kara indicates that the latter was senior to him as a follower of
Aryabhata I.

B. Datta supposed that Prabhdkara was the same person: as
Bhaskara 1? His reason for that supposition was that the words

———_

 

1. Grahaganita, ii. 43.

p. 732 2. See B. Datta, ‘The two Bhaskaras’, IAQ, vol. VI, 1930,

A. Bh, 9

--- Page 70 ---
 

Ixvi INTRODUCTION

‘prabhakara’ and ‘bhaskara’ were synonymous and so the persons called
by those names were one and the same. Datta’s assumption is
contradicted from the reference of one by the other.

Prabhakara mentioned by Bhaskara I is probably the same
person as Prabhakara quoted by Sankaranarayana (869 A.D.) in his
commentary on the Laghu-Bhaskariya, ii. 29. Acarya Prabhakara has
been mentioned and quoted by Udaya-divakara (1073 A.D.) in his
commentary on the Laghu-Bhaskariya, vi.22, and by Nilakantha
(1500 A.D.) in his commentary on the Aryabhatiya, iii. 9. Reference
to one Prabhakara is also made in the Adbhutasagara (1168 A.D.)
of King Ballalasena, and in the Vivahapatala (1522 A.D.) of Pitambara.1
A work called Prabhakara-ganita, written by some Prabhakara, has
been mentioned by Stryadeva (b. 1191 A.D.) in his commentary on
the Laghu-manasa of Maifijula (932 A.D.)

4, SIMHARAJA

References to Sithardja in the commentary? reveal the following
- facts :

(1) That Sithharaja was the author of a book called
Sahasraksara (‘a work comprising 1000 letters’), in which he
reckoned the beginning of a particular yuga (time-cycle)
from Monday, the full moon day of Asadha, Saka year 44
elapsed (corresponding to 122 A.D.), sunrise at Lanka.

(2) That Sithharaja reckoned the day from sunrise to sunrise,
the month from full moon to full moon, and the year from
the (end of the) full moon tithi inthe month of Asadha
(asadhi parnima).

(3) That Simbharaja was also the author of a work on horoscopy
(nativity) in which he wrote :

HAZAKTAATAMTAT:  YAAKAAAAA: 1
This Sirhharaja is probably the same person as Simhacarya
mentioned by Varahamihira in PSi, xv. 19, and Brahmagupta in
BrSpSi, xi.46. “According to Simbhacarya,’’ says Varahamihira,
“(the day is to be reckoned) from sunrise at Lanka.”’

 

 

1. See S.B. Diksita, Bharatiya Jyotisa-sastra (Marathi), Second
edition, pp. 475 and 472.

2. Beginning of the comm.

3. There are altogether two references to Simharaja, both ia
the commentary on verse 11 of the Ka@lakriya-pada, p. 206.

--- Page 71 ---
ARYABHATIYA-BHASYA ixvii

According to Raghunatha-raja (1597 A.D.), Simhacdrya was the
author of a tantra in which he reckoned the month from full moon
to full moon.1

From the reckoning of the year from full moon in the month of
Asadha, it appears that Simhacarya belonged to Magadha where that
reckoning was prevalent in the time of Bhaskara J. Even now the year
prevalent in Bihar by the designation Sala commences from full moon in
the month of Asadha.

5. GARGA AND SPHUJIDHVAJA YAVANESVARA

Of the writers on astrological works, reference is made to Garga
and Sphujidhvaja; the former is mentioned once? and the latter thrice.
Garga is the celebrated author of the Garga-samhita, which, according
to H. Kern, was written about 44 B.C.4 This work has been profusely
quoted by later writers. Sphujidhvaja Yavane$vara was a Greek of
Indian domicile. His work entitled Yavana-jataka has been edited
with English translation by David Pingree. According to David Pingree
the Yavana-jataka was written in the kingdom of the Western
Ksatrapas, with its capital at Ujjayini, about 270 A.D. This work, as
its name suggests, is in Sanskrit and claims to contain 4000 stanzas in
the indravajra metre. Of the three and a half stanzas ascribed to
Sphujidhvaja Yavanegvara by Bhaskara I, three are in the upajati metre
and one-half in the indravajra metre. Quotations from the writings of
Yavaneévara are found to occur also in Bhattotpala’s commentary on
the Brhajjataka and other commentaries on astrological works. It is
interesting to note that the half-verse :

me g granfracsad gt wit aezaat eae

has been ascribed to Yavaneévara by both Bhaskara I and Bhattotpala.*
This shows the Yavanesvara quoted by Bhaskara I is the same person as
quoted by Bhattotpala.

_—__.

 

1. See Raghunatha-raja’s comm. on A, iii. 11.
2. Inthe comm. on 4, iii. 3, p. 178.
3. In the comm. on A, iii. 11, 16, and 17, pp. 207, 215, 218.

P 4. See B8rhat-samhita, translated into Hindi by Baladeva
tasad, Bombay, 1940, Introduction, p. 10.

5. See David Pingree, ‘The Yavana-jataka of Sphujidhyaja’,
Journal Oriental Kes., Madras, vol. XXXI, (1961-62).

, 6 See Bhaskara I’s comm. on A, iii. 11 (p. 207) and Bhattot-
pala’s comm. on BrJa, ii. 21.

--- Page 72 ---
Yeviii INTRODUCTION

7-44, Passages from astronomical works

Bhaskara I quotesa number of passages from his own work,
the Maha-Bhaskariya. Besides these, there are a number of anony-
mous references to and quotations from earlier works on astronomy.
The following quotations seem to be from anterior astronomical
works which are unknown to us:

1. wat ufsate: wet a faa a aca aa 1
Sactar: dat safeties Wat: Fa:

“Bhagana (‘revolution’), rasi (‘sign’), bhage (‘degree’), kala
(‘minute of arc’), vikala (‘second of arc’), and tatpara (‘third
of arc’)--these divisions of the ecliptic are equivalent to the
corresponding divisions of time (viz., year, month, day, nadi
and vinadi).””

It is noteworthy that the Kerala writer Sankara (A.D. 1500-60)
commentator of Bhaskara II's Lilavari has ascribed this verse to
Acarya (Aryabhata I).

2. TAA Wares fadtsrmogacataty fae: |

faatat afar: gaefa rata feclated 0
“Brom the Moon’s first pata (ie., ascending node) onwards,
the Moon’s deviation from the ecliptic (called celestial
latitude) is towards the north ; and from the Moon’s second
pata (i.e., descending node) its deviation is towards the
south (of the ecliptic).”

3, sae qrafaend fedtaranteg HTT

SATTHTTETAA TS aASEAZ IATL Ul
“The planets become visible in the first (quadrant beginning
with the Sighrocca); in the second quadrant, all of them
become retrograde ; in the third quadrant, they become

re-retrograde (i.e., cease retrograde motion and become
direct); and in the fourth quadrant, they set heliacally.”’

4, ggtariteage Fa-Ts-agy FATT |
wag amfaaat @ aasagleat fa: u

“The motion (of a planet) is vakra (retrograde), ativakra
(very retrograde), or anuvakra (re-retrograde or direct),

a

 

j. See K.V. Sarma’s edition of Lilavari, p. 7.

--- Page 73 ---
ARYABHATIYA-BHASYA Ixix

according as the longitude of the sighrocca minus the longi-
tude of the planet is equal to 4, 6, or 8 signs, respectively.”

It is interesting to note that the contents of this stanza closely
agree with those given in MBh, iv. 57.

5, gatshanadl alereaaisegaa: taaTaa: trey: |

“The Sun is a globe of fire; the Moon a globe. of water,
undefiled and pure by its very nature.”’

This hemistitch occurs as a quotation in Govinda-svami’s
commentary on MBA, iv. 4 also.

7-45. References to non-mathematical works and writers

Besides being an-astronomer and mathematician, Bhaskara I
displays a good knowledge of grammar and Vedic literature in general.
There are references in the commentary to the Vedas, Srutis, Smrtis,
the Satapatha-Brahmana, the Brhadaranyaka-Upanisad, the Nirukta,
the Siksa, the Puranas, the Grammar of Panini, the Hastisiksa, the
Asvasiksa, the Visatantra, the Ratnapariksa, the celebrated
Kautilya, the astronomical concepts of the Jainas and of the followers
of the Buddha. Ofa number of anonymous quotations, some have
been traced to the Vajasaneya-Samhita, the Taittiriya-Samhita,
the Satapatha-Brahmana, the Taittiriya-Brahmana, the Manu-Smrti,
the Yajiiavalkya-Smrti, the Amrtabindgpanisat, the Apastamba-
Srautasutra, the Katyayana-Srautasutra, the Paraskara-Grhyasutra,
the Mahebhasya of Patafijali, the Panintyasiksa, the Katantra and
the Bhagavadgita.

7°46. Geographical references
Reference has been made to the following :
(a) Countries and States

Kuru-desa.

2. Kulaparvata-deSa. The countries associated with the seven
mountains, called Kulaparvata, are Kalinga, Pandya,
Aparanta, Bhallata, Mahismati, Atavi and Nisadha. The
mountains associated with these countries are Mahendra,
Malaya, Sahya, Suklimat, Rksa, Vindhya, and Pariyatra,
respectively.t

—

 

1. See B.C. Law, Geographical essays, vol. 1, London, 1937,
Pp.95. Also see Raychaudhuri, Studies in Indian Antiquities, pp.
105-106 and notes.

--- Page 74 ---
Ixx INTRODUCTION

3. Magadha. It comprised the modern districts of Patna, Gaya
and Shahabad of Bihar.1

4. ParaSava-deéa. According to the Brhat-samhita, xiv. 18
the country called Paragava was situated in the north-west
of India. Al-Birtini (973-1048 A.D.) identifies it with
Persia.?

5. Rohana. It was one of the three main provinces of early
Ceylon, It comprised the south-east part of the island,
the Mahavalukanadi forming its northern boundary. Its
capital was Mahagama. Till about 600 A.D., Rohana was
a separate kingdom.

6. Simbhala (Ceylon).

7. Surastra (modern Saurastra or Kathiawar).

(b) Towns and Places

1. Gangadvara (Haradvara).

2. Harukaccha or Haruka. It is probably a corrupt form of
Bhrgukaccha (modern Broach). According to the Divya-

vadana it was a rich and prosperous city, thickly popu-
lated.4

3. Kumari (Kanyakumari).
4. Pataliputra (Modern Patna in Bihar).
5. Sivabhagapura. It was situated at a distance of 24 yojanas

from Valabhi.

ee ee

1. See R.C. Majumdar, Ancient India, Banaras, 1952, p. 351.
Also see B.C. Law, ibid., p. 65.

2. See India, vol. I, p. 302. Cf. Paragava with Parasya (Visnu-
purana, HW, ch.3), also identified with Persia. See N.L. Dey, The
Geographical Dictionary of Anctent and Mediaeval India, London,
1927, p. 149.

3. For details see G.P. Malalasekhara, Dictionary of Pali
Proper Names, London, 1938, vol. II, p. 759.

4. See B.C. Law, ibid., p. 47.

--- Page 75 ---
ARYABHATIYA-BHASYA fexi

6. Sthanesvara. A place in Kuruksetra. According to Bhaskara
I, the latitude of this place was 30° N., and the equinoctial
midday shadow 6 angulas.

7. Ujjayini (modern Ujjain). According to Bhaskara I, the
latitude of Ujjayini was 22°37’ N., and the equinoctial
midday shadow 5 angulas2

8. Valabhi. Jt was situated at Wala, 18 miles north-west of
Bhavanagara.®

75. Notable features of the Aryabhatiya-bhasya
1. Use of numbers and symbolism

Integral and fractional numbers. Bhaskara I freely uses both
integral and fractional numbers, and amply illustrates all arithmetical
operations on integral as well as fractional numbers. The following

results are known to him :
a* (b/c)=(ac = Bc
(alb) + (cld) =(ad* be)|bd
(alb) X (cld)=aclbd
(a/b) —(c/d) ==ad]be
(albY' = a?/b*
(al b)? = a3/b3
V (ajb)= Va] /b
Vajby=Yal Yb.

Fractions are written, as usual, without the line Separating the
numerator and the denominator. Thus, } and 6} are, respectively,
written as:

1 and 6

I
4

ae, ee

I. Seecomm. on A, ii. 16, pp. 95-96. According to Bala-
bhadra, the latitude of Sthaneévara was 30°12’. See AL-Birini’s India,
Vol. IL, p. 317.

2. See comm. on A, ii. 16, p. 95. The latitude of Ujjayini,
according to Aryabhata I and Brahmagupta, was 22°30’N, and 24°N,
Tespectively. See A, iv. 14 and BrSpSi, xxi. 9.

3. See R.C, Majumdar, ibid., p. 552,

--- Page 76 ---
Lexi infRODUCTIGN

Surds. Use is also made by Bhaskara I of surds. He knows that
Ja. /b=J/ab
a. S/b= JS ab
Vab+ Vbe=/W/a-+ Jo), ete.

He has also quoted rules on surds from earlier works.

Symbol for the minus sign. For the minus sign, Bhaskara I
makes use of a little circle (°) on the right of the number to be sub-
tracted. For example, (1/2) — (1/6) is written as :

1 1 or 1 1°
6° 2 6
In later works, the little circle is generally replaced by a dot.t

Negative numbers. Bhaskara I has called a negative number
by the term yza.?2_ The following results are known to him :
b—a=—(a—b), a>b.
(—a) ~(—b)=—(a—2).
a—(—b)=a+b.
(—a)—b=—(at8).

Symbols of operation. Mathematical operations are sometimes
indicated by placing the tachygraphic abbreviations after the quantities
affected. Thus the operation of addition is indicated by kse (from
ksepa), subtraction by a (from antara), multiplication by gu (from

 

 

1. In the Bakhshali Manuscript, the symbol used for the minus
sign is the modern p/us sign (+). In another manuscript acquired
from Kashmir, containing an anonymous commentary on the Pagiganita
of Sridhara, the symbols used for the negative sign are both + and x,
which are sometimes written to the right and sometimes to the left of
the numbers affected. The use of + above the number affected is
found in early Jaina literature. For example, in the commentary,
entitled Dhayala, on the Satkhandagama, Vol. 10, p. 151, the commen-
tator writes — 1 as¢. The letter y, the first letter of the word rna,
is written in the Brahmi script as ¥. It may be that this letter was
originally used to denote the negative sign. Subsequently, ‘tT changed
into +. How the little circle came to be used for the negative sign is
not very clear.

2. In the above-mentioned manuscript, acquired from Kashmir,
free use is made of negative numbers. The number —2, for example,
is written as + 2 or x 2,

--- Page 77 ---
ARY ABHATIYA-BHASYA Ixxiii

gunakara), and division by ha (from hara). Similar abbreviations are
found to be used in the Bakhshali Manuscript also.

Symbols for unknowns. Quantities of unknown value are called
yavattavat (meaning ‘as many as’, or ‘as much as’), or gulika. The
latter term was used earlier by Aryabhata I, and is interpreted by
Bhaskara I as follows :

“By the term gulika is expressed a thing of unknown value,”
Gulika and yavattavat are used as synonyms. Bhaskara I writes :

“These very gulikas of unknown value are called yavattavat.’”

In arithmetical problems the unknown or missing quantities have
been denoted by the zero symbol, as in the Bakhshali Manuscript and
other Hindu works on arithmetic.

2. Classification of mathematics

First Classification. Bhaskara I writes :

“This: mathematics (ganita) is (fundamentally) of two kinds
which permeate the four (fundamental Operations). These two kinds
are increase and decrease. Addition is increase, and subtraction is
decrease. These two varieties permeate the whole of mathematics. So,
it has been said : ‘Multiplication and involution are kinds of addition,
and division and evolution, of subtraction. Seeing that the science
(of mathematics) is permeated by increase and decrease, this science is
to be known as of two kinds.’ ’

To emphasise the above dictum, he raises the following doubts :

“If it is so, how will the operations (of mathematics) be per-
formed ? For, when we multiply 1/4 by 1/5, we get 1/20. But multi-
plication has been defined (above) as a kind of addition, and here it has
turned out to be a kind of subtraction, Similarly, when we divide
1/20 by 1/4, we get 1/5. So, here, (division) which has been defined as
a kind of subtraction has turned out to be a kind of addition,’4

—__.

 

 

1. gfarsrrstafasragqeraecafaetae 1 comm. on A, ii. 30, p. 127.
; 2. Ut Ua gfast aaasa aramid ZeceF# | Comm. on A,
li. 30, p. 128.

3. See the opening lines of the comm. on Ganita-pada, p. 43.

4. Ibid., p. 44.
A. Bh. 10

--- Page 78 ---
Ixxiv INTRODUCTION

He resolves the doubts as follows :

“In both the cases, the doubts are removed as follows: In a
square field with unity as length and breadth, there are twenty rec-
tangular fields. Each one of them has 1/5 for its length, and 1/4 for its
breadth. Their product 1/20 is the area of the (rectangular) field. So
there is no fault (fallacy) if 1/20 divided by 1/4 comes out to be 1/5.
This is how the above doubts are removed geometrically. In order to
remove them symbolically attempts may be made.’”!

The last passage is of special significance to historians of Hindu
mathematics. It proves that in the first half of the seventh century (if
not earlier) use was made of two methods of demonstration in mathe-
matics: (i) geometrical, and (ii) symbolical. In this connection, we
quote the following lines from Datta and Singh’s History of Hindu
Mathematics :?

“The method of demonstration has been stated to be ‘always of
two kinds: one geometrical (Asetragata) and the other symbo-
lical (rasigata)’.3 We do not know who was the first in India
to use geometrical methods in demonstrating algebraical rules.
Bhaskara II ascribes it to ‘ancient teachers’,’’4

Second Classification. Bhaskara I] informs us that certain scholars
classified mathematics under the two heads, ksetra-ganita (‘geometrical
mathematics’) and rasi-ganita(‘symbolical mathematics’).‘“Other teachers
say,” writes he, ‘that mathematics is of two kinds—symbolical (rasi)
and geometrical (ksetra).’§ According to this division, says he, pro-
portion and indeterminate analysis of the first degree, etc., fall under the
former, and series, problems on shadow, etc., fall under the latter. The
‘mathematics of surds’ (karani-parikarma), though it formed part of
algebra (rasi-ganita), was essentially a part of geometry (kserra-ganita),
for its main function was to establish relation between the hypotenuse,
base and the upright.

 

 

4 1. See the opening lines of the commentary on Ganita-pada,
p. 44.

2. Part II, pp. 3-4.

3. BBi, Benaras Sanskrit Series, p. 125.
4. BBi, p. 127.

5

._ See the opening lines of the commentary on Ganita-pada,
pp. 44-45.

--- Page 79 ---
ARYABHATTY A.BHASYA Inxs

It may be asked : On what grounds were series classified under
geometrical mathematics ? To a student of modern mathematics, who
recognizes series as part of algebra, the question is quite relevant. But
nowhere in his commentary has Bhaskara I made an attempt to throw
light on this point. The mathematics of series has special reference to
‘the area ofa ladder’. The word Sredhi, which is used to denote a
series in Hindu mathematics, means a ‘ladder’; the word pada or gaccha,
which is used to mean the number of terms in a series, means the
‘steps of a ladder’; and the word Sredhi-phala, which is used for the
the sum of a series, means the ‘area of a ladder’. This clearly shows
why in Hindu mathematics series were called by the name sredhi
(‘ladder’). The above explanation is confirmed by the writings of later
Hindu mathematicians. For example, the celebrated Sridharacarya in
his Patiganita, describes the series-figure as follows :

“TI shall now describe the method for finding the lengths of the
base (i.e, lower side) and the face (i.e, upper side) of the
(ladder-like) series-figure (corresponding to the first term of
the series),

The number of terms, i.e., one, is the altitude of the (corres-
ponding) series-figure ; the first term of the series as diminished
by half the common difference of the series is the base ; and that
(base) increased by the common difference of the series is the
face......

“Having constructed the series-figure (for altitude unity) in this
manner, one should determine the face for the desired altitude
(i.e., for the desired number of terms of the series) (by the
following rule) :

The face (for altitude unity) minus the base (for altitude unity),
multiplied by the desired altitude, and then increased by the
base (for altitude unity), gives the face (for the desired altitude).

So has also been stated by Narayana in his Ganita-kaummudi.4
Moreover, some of the problems set by Narayana are based on ladder-
like figures ; and in the solutions supplied to those problems, Narayana
has actually drawn such figures. Prthtidaka also makes a similar
remark in his commentary on the Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta.

eC

 

1. For details, see K.S, Shukla, Patiganita, English translation,
Pp. 66-68.

2. GK, Part H, rule 73-74, pp. 85-86.

--- Page 80 ---
lsrvi {INTRODUCTION

He writes :

“The sanhkalita (ie. ‘the sum of a series’), which has been
exhibited by Acarya Skandasena on the analogy of a ladder, is
meant to demonstrate it by means of a figure.”

The ladder-like figure representing a series had a smaller base
and a larger top, so it looked like a drinking glass. §ridhara has,
therefore, compared a series figure with a drinking glass. Writes he:

“As inthe case of an earthen drinking pot (sarava) the width at
the base is smaller and at the top greater, so also is the case with
a series-figure.””*

Tt is thus clear why in early days series were jooked upon as part
of geometrical mathematics, not of algebra, as in modern mathematics.

3. The four bijas of Ganita and their nomenclature

BhaskaraI refers to the four bijas of Ganita, and calls them
prathama (first), dvitiya (second), trtiva (third), and caturtha (fourth),
or ydvattavat, vargavarga, ghanaghana, and yisama® Bija means
‘method of analysis’. It is stated to be of four kinds, because in

- Hindu mathematics equations are classified into four varieties. Each
class of equations has its own method of analysis. The yavattavat-bija
is the ‘method of solving simple equations’, the vargavarga-bija is the
‘method of solving quadratic equations’, the ghanaghana-bija is the
‘method of solving cubic equations’, and the visama-bija is the ‘method
of solving equations with more than one unknown’.

The above nomenclature of four bifas has not been found in
any other known work on Hindu mathematics. In an anonymous
commentary on the Kuttakadhyaya (a chapter of the Brahma-sphuta-
siddhanta)® the quartet of the four bijas is said to consist of (i) the
theory of solving simple equations (ekavarna-samikarana), (ii) the

 

 

1. Quoted by Prthtdaka in his comm. on BrS pSi, xii. 2.
2. PG, English translation, p. 66.
3. See Bhaskara I’s comm. on A, i. 1, p. 7.

4. Cf. B. Datta and A.N. Singh, History of Hindu Mathe-
matics, Part II, p. 6.

5. A photostat copy of this comm. is in our collection.

--- Page 81 ---
ARYABHATIYA. BHASYA Ixxvii

elimination of the middle term (madhyamaharana), i.e., the theory of
solving quadratic equations, (iii) the theory of solving equations
involving several unknowns (anekavarna-samikarana), and (iv) the
theory of solving equations of the type axy=bx +cy +d (called bhayita).
This quartet of the four bijas is mentioned also by Bhaskara II.

4. Symbolic algebra earlier to Bhaskara I

We have seen above that Bhaskara I in his commentary makes
use of the unknown quantities ydayatiavat and gulika. The commentary
due to its limited scope does not throw much light on the contemporary
algebra, but there are reasons to believe that symbolic algebra had very
much developed by that time. In this connection, we will draw the
attention of historians of mathematics to a very significant term men-
tioned by Bhaskara I. This is ya@vakarana. Bhaskara I writes : “yarga,
karani, krti, vargana, and yavakarana are synonyms.’® We thus see
that, according to Bhaskara I, the word yavakarana means ‘squaring’.
The literal meaning of that word is ‘making yava’2 But what is that
yava? According to V.S. Apte’s Sanskrit-English Dictionary, the
word yaéva means (i) food prepared from barley, or (ii) red dye.
Etymologically, that word may mean ‘to mix’ or ‘to separate’
(jyu+ ghati). If these are the possible meanings of the word yava, how
is it that BhaskaraI takes yavakarana as a synonym of varga (or
squaring) ? The word ydvakurana owes for its origin to algebraic
symbolism. In the commentary of Prthtdaka on the Brahma-sphuta-
siddhanta, the equation 10x—8 =x? +1 is written as

yava 0 ya 10 ma 8
yava 1 ya 0 rai.

This is the standard Hindu symbolism, and was always used in analysis.
It occurs in all Hindu works on algebra, especially, the commentaries on
algebraical works. In this symbolism, ya is used as an abbreviation of
yavattavat (‘the unknown quantity’, i.e., x), and yava as an abbreviation
of yavattavadvarga (‘the square of the unknown quantity’, i.e., x8); rz
stands for rapa (‘absolute term’). Thus we see that, according to the
algebraic symbolism of the Hindus, yvava stands for yavattavad-varga

re

 

 

1. See BBi, ekavarna-samikarana, 1-3 (comm.).
2. Comm. on ii. 3, p. 47.

; 3. Cf. sama-karana, meaning ‘making equal’, or ‘equating’, or
equation’ (sama = equal, AKarana=making).

--- Page 82 ---
Ixxviii INTRODUCTION

(‘the square of any quantity whatever’). Yavakarana, therefore, means
‘making the square of any quantity’, i.e. ‘squaring a quantity’, or
simply ‘squaring’.

The term yayakarana was evidently coined after the symbolism
on which it is based was developed in India. Bhaskara I mentions that
word as one of the synonyms of varga (‘squaring’), but nowhere in his
commentary has he used that term. It is probable that it was handed
down to him by tradition.

5. Use of unusual or special terms

(i) The term udvartana (meaning ‘multiplication’). Bhaskara I
writes : “saivarga, ghata, gunand, hetih, and udvartana are synonyms.”
The term savnvarga is used but rarely, but the term udvartana is rather
unusual, as it is not found to occur in any other work. It is similar to
the term apavartana (meaning ‘division’) and is evidently its antonym.

The word abhyasa is also used in the sense of multiplication.

(ii) Terms for the surd. The usual Hindu term for the surd is
karani. Bhaskara I, in addition to this term, has also used the term
karani (or karanika)2 Both these terms are also found to occur in the

gathas quoted by Bhaskara I. So it seems that both these forms were
used in early times.

It is interesting to note that the term karani, or karani, when
Operating on a number (>1), is generally used in its plural form. That
is to say, instead for writing karani 216, it is written as karunyah 216.
Still more interesting is the method of writing the karant of a compound
fraction. For example, Bhaskara I writes :

a/ 31 42683983
1953125000
in the following way :

42683983

karanyah 31, karanibhagas ca 1953125000

 

1. See comm, on A ii. 3 (i), p. 49.
2. Comm. on A, ii. 7 and 10.

--- Page 83 ---
ARYABHATIYA-BHASYA iexiz

(iii) Terms for ‘power’ and ‘root’. We have seen above that the
terms abhyasa, sarnvarga, ghata, gunanda, hatih, and udvartana have been
used by Bhaskara I in the sense of multiplication. More particularly,
these terms have been used in the sense of ‘multiplication of unequal
quantities’. For the multiplication of equal quantities, Bhaskara I uses
a special term, ‘gata’. “Gunana is the multiplication (abhyasa) of
unequal quantities, and gata,” says he, ‘‘is the multiplication of equal
quantities.”! The term dvigata, according to him, means ‘square’,
trigata means ‘cube’, and so on. The dvigata of 4 is the product of
4 and 4, fe., 4’; the ¢rigata of 4 is the continued product of 4 and 4
and 4, i.e.,47; andsoon. According to this terminology, m* wiil be
expressed by saying ‘n gata of m’, which corresponds to our present-
day expression ‘n power of m’. Following the same terminology,
the roots have been called gatamula. Thus 4is the dvigatamula of
4°, the trigatamula of 48, and so on. In general, m is the ‘ni
gatamtla of m’’. This, too, corresponds to the modern expression
‘n® root of m*,

The credit of this scientific terminology is given to Brahmagupta.?
But it was devised by some earlier Hindu mathematician, as both
those terms, gata and gatamiula, are found to be used in the same sense
in a stanza quoted by Bhaskara I from some earlier work.

The term bhavitaka (or bhavita), which Brahmagupta uses in the
sense of ‘the product of two dissimilar quantities’, does not occur in the
commentary. Brahinagupta writes:

“The product of two equal quantities is called varga (‘square’) ;
the product of three or more equal quantities is called ‘the gata
of that quantity’ ; and the product of (two) dissimitar quantities
is called bhavitaka.’’>

(iv) Other notable terms. The following unusual terms used by
Bhaskara I also deserve notice :

1. adhyardhasrikgetra (=a right-angled triangle).

 

1, wagaal Uealeearal aay 1 ae FeatFaa: 1 See the opening
lines of the commentary on Ganita-pada, p. 43.

_ 2, See B. Datta and A.N. Singh, History of Hindu Mathe-
matics, Part LU, p. 10.

3. BrSpSi, xviii. 42,

--- Page 84 ---
Ixxx INTRODUCTION

2. sankalana (=the sum of a series of natural numbers).!

3. vargasankalana (=the sum of a series of squares of natural
numbers).?

4. ghanasankalana (=the sum of a series of cubes of natural
numbers).3

5. sankalana-sankalana (=the sum of the series

1 + (+2) +(1+2+3)+.,.to # terms).4

6. jalada, jaladhara, payodhara, megha, etc. (=zero). These
terms are generally used to denote the number 17, but
Bhaskara I has used these to denote zero (0).

7. suksmaka (=the number 24).

6. Weights and Measures

The weights and measures used by Bhaskara I and relations
between them may be stated in tabular form as follows :
(i) Measures of gold, saffron, etc.®
5 guijas = 1 masaka
16 masakas = 1 karsa
4 karsas = 1 pala
2000 palas = 1 bhara
(ii) Measures of grain, etc.®
4 manakas = 1 setika (or setika)
4 setikas = 1 kuduya
4 kuduvas = 1 prastha
(iii) Money measures

lrapaka = 20 vimsopakas?

 

The usual term is sankalita.

The usual term is yargasankalita.
The usual term is ghanasankalita.
The usual term is satkalita-sankalita.

Cf. PG, definition 10; Tris, def. 5; Kautilya’s Arthasastra,
ii, ch. xix; ‘Abhid hanappadipika, gathas 479- 80; GK, def. 5; ZL,
def. 4; Raghunatha-raja’s comm. on A, ii. 2.

6. Cf. GT, def. 7; Anuyogadvarasutra. The latter is quoted
by H.R. Kapadia in the introduction (p. xxxvii) to his edition of
the GT.

7. Vimsopaka really means ‘one-twentieth part’. So one-
twentieth of any measure may be called a virnsopaka of that measure.

weer

--- Page 85 ---
ARYABHATIYA-BHASYA bxxxi

Other measures used by Bhaskara I are the same as stated by
Aryabhata I.

7. Classification of the Pulveriser (Kuttakara)

Bhaskara I is the first to classify mathematical problems based
on the indeterminate equation of the first degree called pulveriser
(kuttakara) into two types: (i) Residual Pulveriser (sagra-kuttakara)
and (ii) Non-residual Pulveriser (niragra-kuttakara). These types may
be illustrated by means of the following examples :

Residual Pulverizer : Find what is that number which leaves |
as remainder when divided by 5, and 2 (as remainder) when
divided by 7.

Non-residual Pulveriser : 8 is multiplied by some number and
the product is increased by 6 and that sum is then divided by
13. If the division be exact, what is the unknown multiplier and
what is the resulting quotient ?

An astronomical problem based on the indeterminate equation
of the first degree is called ‘Planetary Pulveriser’ (graha-kuttakara).
Bhaskara I in his commentary illustrates numerous types of such
problems. Two types, which deserve particular notice, may be
mentioned here. One is called “‘Week-day Pulveriser’ (vara-kuttakara)
and the other is called ‘Time Pulveriser’ (vela-kuttakara). Examples of
these types are :

Week-day Pulveriser : The mean (position) of the Sun (for
sunrise) on a Wednesday is stated to be 8 signs, 25 degrees,
36€ minutes, and 10 seconds. Say correctly after how much time
(since the beginning of Kaliyuga) will the Sun again assume the
same position (at sunrise) on a Thursday, a Friday, and a
Wednesday.

Time Pulveriser : The revolutions, etc., of the Sun’s mean
longitude, calculated from an ahargana plus a few nadis elapsed,
have now been destroyed by the wind ; the residue of the
minutes is seen by me to be equal to 71. State the ahargana,
the Sun’s (mean) longitude, and the correct value of the nadis
(used in the calculation).

A. Bh, IL

--- Page 86 ---
Ixexii INTRODUCTION

8. Examples illustrating Aryabhata I’s rules

The examples, as mentioned earlier, form one of the miost
notable features of Bhaskara I’s mathematics, The set of Bhaskara I’s
examples consists of as many as 124 problems which are the earliest on
record excepting those of the Bakhshali Manuscript of uncertain date.

Some of the methods employed by Bhaskara I are also worthy
of note. Mention may, for example, be made of his ingenious method
for finding the Sun’s longitude from the residue of the omitted lunar
days (avamasesa).!

9, Tables for the equation ax—1=by

Bhaskara I’s tables giving the least integral solutions of the
equation ax —1=by corresponding to all sets of values of a and 5 that
may arise in astronomical problems based on the pulveriser are given
towards the end of the commentary on the Ganita-pada. They are
meant to facilitate the solution of astronomical problems based

_ onthe theory of the pulveriser and form a unique feature of Bhaskara
T’s mathematics, as tables of the kind are not to be met with in any
other known work on Hindu mathematics?

10. Multiple worded number-chronograms

In order to express a number in Sanskrit composition, use is
generally made of a single word. But Bhaskara I has departed from
this practice and in his commentary on the Ganita-pada, he has some-
times employed more than one word to express large numbers. For
example, he has expressed the numbers

243864 by Fatal ava: qenar:, (p. 153)

113078 by aaane go: fitatza, (p. 156)

108276 by azarazaezaa: aETA , (p. 164)

76053038 by eat TeMaDUTgaaTargste:, (p. 164)

and 3224216707 by araeatizafecaatsazera aa: aaa, (p. 165).
7:6. Popularity

Bhiaskara I’s commentary on the Aryabhatiya was welcomed by
scholars of both North and South India. A copy of this commentary

 

nee

 

1. See Appendix I, Ex. 122.
2. For these tables, see Appendix II.

--- Page 87 ---
ARYABHATIYA-BHASYA , Ixzxiti

was available to Prthtidaka (860 A.D.), the well-known commentator
of Brahmagupta (628 A.D.), who belonged to North India. In
his commentary on the Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta, written in 860 A.D.
at Kannauj' in Uttar Pradesh, he has referred to Bhaskara I -and
his commentary on more than one occasion.2. He has also extracted
a number of examples from Bhaskara I’s commentary. The bamboo
problem, the lotus problem and the cat and mouse problem which
occur in Pythtidaka’s commentary are undoubtedly taken from
Bhaskara I’s commentary. In the case of the first two, even the data
supplied by Prthtidaka is the same as given by Bhaskaral. In South
India, the earliest reference to Bhaskara I’s commentary occurs in
Sankaranarayana’s commentary on the Laghu-Bhaskariya? which
was written at Quilon, an ancient centre of learning in Kerala, in
869 A.D. Other references to this commentary in South India occur
in Siryadeva’s commentaries on the Aryabhatiya and the Laghu-manasa
of Mafijula (932 A.D.), the latter of which was written at Gangipura
or Gangapuri (Gangai-konda-Colapuram) in Cola, in Raghunatha-
raja’s commentary on the Aryabhatiya, which was written at Ahobila
in Karnatak (now in Andhra State), and in Sankara-and-Nardyana’s
commentary on the Lilavati of Bhaskara Il, which was written
somewhere in Central Kerala in the sixteenth century A.D. Mention
of Bhaskara I’s commentary is made also in the Kuttakara-siromani
of Devaraja.

There are reasons to believe that as late as lith and 12th
centuries A.D. Bhaskara I’s commentary was still a popular work
in Gujarat where it was originally written. But this work was
considered difficult by the students there and Someévara, who belonged
to that part of the country, had to abridge it to suit the needs of his
pupils. Someégvara’s commentary on the Aryabhatiya presents an
excellent summary of Bhaskara I’s commentary with necessary omissions
and modifications. In the concluding stanza of the commentary,
he says :

“This small but excellent exposition (of the Aryabhatiya)

which gives its true meaning and is easily comprehensible by

those of immature intellect, is composed by extracting the essence
of Bhaskara I’s commentary on the aphorisms of Aryabhata by

1. See S.B. Diksita, Bharatiya J yotisa-Sastra (Marathi), p. 236.

2. One reference occurs under BrSpSi, xi. 22, and three under
BrS pSi, xi. 26.

3. See opening lines and comm. on viii. 19.

--- Page 88 ---
\xxxiy INTRODUCTION

Somegvara whose intellect has been purified by (the study of)
logic, grammar, etc.”

In the opening stanza, he remarks :

“Tam writing this exposition (vrtti) briefly but explicitly for
the benefit of (my) pupils.”

The later commentators of the Aryabhatiya, such as Stryadeva
(b. 1191 A.D.), Yallaya (1480 A.D.) and Raghunatha-raja (1597 A.D.),
have drawn a good deal of matter from the commentary of Bhaskara I.
A large number of examples found in their commentaries are either
reproductions of Bhaskara I’s examples or based on them, and several
comments are almost the same. The commentator Raghunatha-
raja (1597 A.D.) has quoted also a few passages from Bhaskara
Y’s commentary. It seems that the above-mentioned commentators
have made persistent use of Bhaskara I’s commentary while writing
their own. The commentator ParameSvara (1431 A.D.), however,
. has based his commentary on that of Stryadeva, whereas Ghatigopa
(after 1800 A.D.), being a follower of Parame$vara, has based his
commentary on that of Paramesvara.

8. SCHOLIASTS OF BHASKARA I

Of the scholiasts of Bhaskara I, we know of the following through
their works or references to them by later writers :

1. Govinda-svami, who wrote a commentary on the Maha-
Bhaskariya.

2. Sankaranarayana (869 A.D.), who wrote a commentary on
the Laghu-Bhaskariya.

3. Udayadivakara (1073 A.D.), who wrote 4 commentary on
the Laghu-Bhaskariya.

4. Suryadeva (b. 1191 A.D.), who wrote an illucidation of
Govinda-svami’s commentary on the Maha-Bhaskariya.

5. Makkibhatta (1377 A.D.), who wrote a commentary on the
Maha-Bhaskariya.

6. Paramegvara (1431 A.D.), who wrote (i) a commentary
on the Laghu-Bhaskariya, (ii) a sub-commentary on
Govinda-svami’s commentary on the Maha-Bhaskariya, and
(iii) a commentary on the Maha-BhasRariya.

--- Page 89 ---
SCHOLIASTS OF BHASKARA lzxxv

7. Sankara (b. 1494 A.D.), of the Mahisamangalam family of
Nampitiri brahmanas, who wrote a commentary on the
Laghu-Bhaskariya in Malayalam.

8: Anonymous : (i) the authors of commentaries on the
Laghu-Bhaskariya in Malayalam, and (ii) the author of a
commentary on the Laghy-Bhaskariya in old Malayalam.

The details of the above-mentioned commentaries, and the
light thrown by them on their authors and other aspects of historical
interest are furnished in the following sections.

8-1. Commentaries on the Maha-Bhaskariya
1. Govinda-syami’s commentary

This commentary along with Paramegvara’s super-commentary
(entitled Siddhanta-dipika) has been critically edited by T.S. Kuppanna
Sastri and published in 1957 in Madras Govt. Or. Series (No. cxxx).

A manuscript of this commentary exists in the Lucknow
University Library. Its beginning and end are as follows :

Title : WTERTA-ATEA

Beginning : Treat wen anat agifaaasarataecraae
dacgufadar veaatafear ala aerate
aetaladt fae: TAT ado AEH TT
enema ae fafear geacangaarcaaat sata

End: graiaae: faamgad aa gafeeraary

afte favazalsea aeznad TaTHVs THT: 1

aeat acafagvacagiaaraafcaatiafa

eared fafiant saat geqerg TifaeaAeAT AAT
Colophon : gla mrentigasy aifaeceatiaad ascatseara: 1
Post-colophon : H\fartq Far Aer Tfseacqreqarfaat |

aRtal HieHUaey yReareafraeay vu

From the title of the commentary and the colophons, it is evident
that the commentary was called Bhaskariya-bhasya. In one manu-
script belonging to the Curator’s Office Library, Trivandrum, and
in another belonging to H.H. the Maharajah’s Palace Library,

--- Page 90 ---
taxxvi INTRODUCTION

Trivandrum, the same commentary is entitled Maha-Bhaskuriya-bhasya,
and the same name appears in the colophons also.

This commentary provides an excellent exposition of the contents
of the Maha-Bhaskariya, giving the rationale of the rules and also at
some places suitable examples illustrating the rules. It is the earliest
and most famous commentary on the Maha-Bhaskariya. The impor-
tance of this commentary can be easily judged from the fact that
Suryadeva (b, 1191 A.D.) and Parameévara (1431 A.D.), both wrote
sub-commentaries on this commentary.

It is interesting to note that in the stanza occurring in the post-
script, the commentary is called ‘Govinda-svamya’. Stiryadeva (6. 1191
A.D.), too, in the end of his commentary on the Laghu-manasa of
Manjula, calls it by the same name. So it appears that the above
commentary was known after the name of its author, like so many
other works on Hindu astronomy.

From the author’s own statements in the concluding stanza of
the commentary and the colophons at the ends of the chapters, it is
clear that the author of the commentary is Govinda-svamt.

One Govinda is mentioned by Sankaranarayana (869 A.D.) in
his commentary on the Leghu-Bhaskariya. He is called Acarya Bhatta
Govinda, Govindacarya, and also simply Govinda. Sankaranarayana
has also quoted a number of passages from a work of that author
referred to as Govinda-kr1i (‘A composition of Govinda’), Bhatta
Govinda is also mentioned and quoted by Udayadivakara (1073 A.D.)
in his commentary on the Laghu-Bhaskariya. Posterior writers hailing
from Kerala have also referred to Bhatta-Govinda and quoted from
his works, Thus, Sankara (1534 A.D.), in his commentary on the
Lilayati of Bhaskara TI (1150 A.D.), quotes several passages from
the Govinda-krti. So it seems that Govinda-krti was a popular work.

Although the earlier writers have preserved a distinction between
Govinda-svami and Bhatta-Govinda by calling the author of the
commentary on the Aryabhetiya by the former name and the author
of the Goyinda-krti by the latter, Sankara (1534 A.D.), the commentator
of the Lilarat?, who has quoted three passages from Govinda-svami’s
commentary on the Maha-Bhaskariya and a number of verses from
the Govinda-krti, does not differentiate between the two authors and
calls both of them by the name Govinda-svami. This means that
Govinda-svami and Bhatta-Govinda are the names of one and the same
person. There are other reasons too to support this identification :

--- Page 91 ---
SCHOLIASTS OF BHASKARA txxxvii

(1) There is a stanza in sardulavikridita metre in Govinda-
svami’s commentary on the Maha-Bhaskariya (i. 47) which
states a rule for obtaining the optional number (mati) in the
process of solving a pulveriser. Exactly the same rule is
given in two stanzas in arya metre quoted from the Govinda-
krti by Satkaranarayana in his commentary on the Laghu-
Bhaskariya (viii. 18). This rule is not found to occur in
any other work and is a characteristic feature of these two
works only.

(2) In his commentary on the Maha-Bhaskariya (iv. 37-38),
Govinda-svami has expressed the opinion that the sighra
epicycles stated by Aryabhata I correspond to the beginnings
of the respective anomalistic quadrants, whereas the manda
epicycles stated by the same author correspond to the end-
points of the respective anomalistic quadrants. Udayadiva-
kara in his commentary on the Laghu-Bhaskariya (ii. 31-32)
quotes two verses from the Govinda-krti which give a rule
for finding the manda or Sighra epicycle corresponding to
any given anomaly. This rule is also based on the same
notion that the tabulated manda and Sighra epicycles
correspond to the ends and beginnings of the anomalistic
quadrants, respectively. This notion is also a characteristic
feature of these two works only. No other Hindu astronomer
has subscribed to this view.

(3) The term ‘Bhatta’ prefixed to Govinda or ‘Svami’ suffixed
to Govinda does. not make any significant difference in the
name. For, Brahmanas in South India are generally
addressed as ‘Svami’ and a learned man a ‘Bhatta’,

There are three solved examples in the commentary which yield
the same latitude. Having completed the solution of the first example,
Govinda-svami writes :

“This gives the Rsine of the latitude. This is 588 (minutes) for
the local place.”

This corresponds to latitude 9°50'N., and probably indicates the latitude
of the place to which the commentator Govinda-svami belonged. It
is interesting to note that the commentator Sankaran@rayana lived
about 1° south and the commentator Suryadeva about 1° north of
Govinda-syami’s latitude.

--- Page 92 ---
lexxvili INTRODUCTION

T.S. Kuppanna Sastri and K.V. Sarma are of the opinion that
Govinda-svami belonged to Kerala and was a teacher of Sankaranarayana
(who has mentioned him and quoted from his work). The basis of
the latter conclusion is the alleged occurrence of the following passage
in the last folios of a manuscript of Nilakantha’s (1500 A.D.)
Grahanadi-grantha :

“These two arya verses (dealing with the manuyuga correction)
were seen by me in Sankaranarayana’s commentary on the
Laghu-Bhaskariya. Govinda-svami, too, did not see the verses
giving the bija correction, beginning with bhavabhanu. He saw
only one nibandha-correction, That has been stated in the
Govinda-ky ti, wc. crue On the death of Govinda-svami, his
pupil Sankaranarayana, having obtained the Bhaga-correction
beginning with vagbhavonat, and observing a solar eclipse at
Mahodayapura, informed King Kulasekhara of his discovery.
By him, this was popularised in Kerala.”

But this passage does not seem to state the facts correctly.
For Sankaranarayana who is said tobe the discoverer of the Bhata-
correction, has nothing to do with this correction. In fact, this
correction was known in Kerala much earlier. It is found to be stated
along with Manuyuga and Kalpa corrections in the Karaga-ratna
written in 689 A.D. by Deva, son of Gojanma.

There are also reasons to suspect that Govinda-svami was either
anterior to or a senior contemporary of Haridatta. For Sankaranarayana
(869 A.D.), in one of the opening stanzas of his commentary on the
Laghu-Bhaskariya, while paying obeisance to earlier scholars, gives
priority to Govinda over Haridatta :

“Having paid obeisance by lowering my head to Acarya Arya-
bhata, Vardhamihira, Srimadguru Bhaskara, Govinda and
Haridatta, one after the other in the order stated (kramat), I
give out...”

Notwithstanding what has been said above, Nilakantha’s re-
ference (in the above passage) to Sahkaranarayana as ‘pupil of
Govinda-svami’ is so clear and definite that, until this matter receives
new light, we are inclined to agree with Sarma in placing Govinda-
svami in the first half of the ninth century of the Christian era.
Priority to Govinda over Haridatta by Sankaranarayana in paying his
obcisance probably suggests that in the eyes of Sankaranarayana his
teacher Govinda deserves a place next only to his paramaguru Bhaskara.

--- Page 93 ---
SCHOLIASTS OF BHASKARA jaxxix

Govinda-svami refers to earlier writers without naming them
and quotes from the Aryabhafiya of Aryabhata I, the Laghu-
Bhaskariya of Bhaskara 1, and the Brhat-samhita of Varahamihira.
A number of exampics are taken from Bhaskara P's commentary on
the Aryabhatiya. A few stanzas are the commentator’s own
composition. It is noteworthy that Haridatta is not mentioned or cited.
Similarly, the use of the Aafapayadi system of writing numbers is not

made in the commentary.

Govinda-svami’s commentary on the Maha-Bhdaskariya became
a popular work, as it provided facility in the study of the Maha-
Bhaskariya which was regarded asthe most important work on the
system of astronomy promulgated by Aryabhatai. But the language
of that commentary was later considered to be ditficult, and so it could
not be comprehended easily by all. it required its own illucidation.
The commentary of SUryadeva and Siddhanta-dipika of Paramesvara
were written to supply this want and to make the commentary more
up to date.

Govinda-svami’s commentary is of great» utility for a historian
of science, as it explains the rationale of tne rules with reference to
the constructions in the armillary sphere which throws light on the
astronomical methods used by the Hindu astronomers in those times.

It also shows that its author was not only a commentator but
also an original writer who made his own contributions to mathematics.
The most notable contributions are his second order interpolation
formulae for computing the Rsine-differences in the three signs of a
quadrant.!

References to Govinda-svami’s commentary and quotations
from it are found to occur in Nilakantha’s commentary on the
Aryabhatiya and in Sankara’s commentary on the Lila@yati. All these
quotations are traceable to Govinda-svami’s commentary. This shows
that this commentary was studied at least up to the middle of the 16th
century A.D.

ee ce

1. See his comm. on MBh, iv. 22. Also see R.C. Gupta,
‘Fractional parts of Aryabhata’s sines, etc.’, IJHS, vol. 6, no. 1,
1971, pp. 51-59.

A. Bh 12

--- Page 94 ---
ze

INTRODUCTION

2. StUryadeva’s commentary

From the following remark occurring at the end of Sitryadeva’s

commentary on the Laghu-manasa of Mafijula, we learn that
Stryadeva wrote an explanatory commentary on Govinda-svami’s
commentary on the Maha-Bhaskariya and that it was his first
composition :

“T state in chronological order the works written by me in
the past. First of all I explained (Govinda-svami’s) commentary,
entitled Govindasyamya, on the maha-tantra of Bhaskaracarya
(i.e, the Maha-Bhaskariya). Then I wrote a brief exposition
of the Aryabhatiya-sastra under the title Bhata-prakasa. There-
after I briefly explained the Maha-ydtra (Yoga-yatra) of Varaha-
mihira. Then I explained in detail this (Laghu) manasa-karana,
with a view to providing both mila-vasan2 and samksepa-vasana.
At present I am writing an exposition of Sripati’s Jataka-
paddhati, 1am sure it will be brought to a successful finish by
the grace of Goddess Sarasvati.”

Datta was of the opinion that the commentary on the Maha-

Bhaskariya which bears the name Prayoga-racana was by Stryadeva.’
But this conjecture has so far not been proved to be correct.

3. The Prayoga-racana

This commentary begins with the verses :

saad faaatast & a ver aeatfea: sg:
aeq @ fagtater faeardtat serareat

fead TATA Tara BrEHUAT 1
aqt sdifata carafadt @ qeracgft u

aardat dat aafaq aafag aadtaTsT AIT |
aearaegia aa gacegearafad Tat sez 1

1. See B. Datta, ‘The two Bhaskaras’, IHQ, vol. VI, 1930,

pp. 727-36.

--- Page 95 ---
SCHOLIASTS OF BHASKARA xci

Tt ends: ganvefeasra: ofeordafeerc: |
agra af aacrat [ fazafire regener u
Colophon: sfa agratenOreareami satizaaramesdiseara: |

The name of the commentator and the time and place of his
birth or activity are not mentioned anywhere in the commentary.

The commentary aims, as the name of the commentary implies,
at explaining the practical applications of the rules enunciated in the
Maha-Bhaskariya. The work is more or less a sort of running
commentary. No attempt is made to explain the theoretical back-
ground, or the rationales of the rules, or to illustrate them by suitable
examples. The commentator has, however, carefully coined . signi-
ficant letter-chronograms with right-to-left arrangement, expressing
relevant numerical constants, with the view to making the rules easier
to remember and more suitable for practical application. For example,
the number 1,55,52,00,000, denoting the number of solar days in
a yuga, is expressed by the formula annajiio nanu brahmano manyah.
It is interesting to note in this connection that the verse giving the
letter-chronograms for the twenty-four Rsines of the arcs 225’, 450’,
675’, etc., which occurs in the commentary, is the same as stated
by Sankaranarayana (869 A.D.) in his commentary on the Laghu-
Bhaskariya2

Besides commenting on the text of the Maha-Bhaskariya the
commentator explains also a number of verses occurring in Govinda-
svami’s commentary on the Maha-Bhaskariya, and which seem to be
Govinda-svami’s own compositions.

The commentator has, at some places in the commentary, quoted
passages from the works of anterior writers, but has not mentioned the
Sources from which those passages have been taken. Of these, three
passages? are found to be from the Aryabhatiya, one from the T risatika
of Sridhara (c. 900 A.D.),? and one from the Laghu-Bhaskariya.!

1. ii. 2(c-d), 3.

2. A, ii. 26, quoted under MBh, i. 20; A, ii. 28, quoted under
MBh, i. 52 ; and A, ii. 4, quoted under MBA, ii. 10.

3. Tri¢, Rule 24 (a-b), quoted under MBA, i. 20.
4. Comprising LBA, i. 22, 19, 20 and 2].

--- Page 96 ---
“xsi INTRODUCTION

4. Makkibhatta’s commentary

About three and a half chapters of Makkibhatta’s commentary
on the Siddhanta-sekhara of Stipati have been published by the
Calcutta University (1932 A. D.). In that printed portion Makkibhatta
has referred to his commentary on the Meha-Fhaskariya for detailed
explanations on six occasions. The references are as follows :

1. “The remaining exposition of this verse has been given by
me inthe commentary on the Brhad-Bhaskariva, entitled
Ganita-vilasa. So 1 stop here’”’.t

2. “This stanza has several meanings. All of them have been
discussed by me in the Ganita-vilasa, by way of explaining
another verse. So I stop here.’

3. “These verses have been explained by me in detail in the
Ganita-vilasa.’”?

4. “The (lengths of) orbits of the other planets being fractional,
(the author) has not made use of them for finding (the length
of) the orbit of the sky. (But) in the Ganita-vilasa we have
shown that the orbit of the sky can be determined from
them also. Here, for fear of increasing the size of the book,
we stop.”

5. “Other things, such as rationale, etc., have (already) been
discussed by us in (our) commentary on the Brhad-
Bhaskariya, entitled the Ganita-vilasa, so we stop (now).’

1 meq seitata facet area gequrentreqrenat afoafrarare-
seafa: safsaacqazaa 1 See comm. on Sie, ii. 19.

2. sem Ratata agatsal: afa a ag aclarawereniaeasa afi
fanasenfa: safSaar geqrerat 1 See comm. on SiSe, ii, 25.

3. waraat afqafaenaseatfa: asqsd sofsaa: 1 See comm. on
Si§e, ii. 42,

4. RATHI, aaa ARAAT T HIATT | aTfaecarHrear-
seat afrafaarsenfa: safaaq 1 ge gq aeadt<raargaxrat | See
comm. on. SiSe, ii. 59.

5. waz aaarfes agigrenttasmeaa afmafamaseatfa: safeaa-
faeqrzFgt | See comm. on SiSe, iii. 65,

--- Page 97 ---
SCHOLIASTS OF BHASKARA xceiil

6. “The methods of testing the level of the ground and the
perpendicularity of the “"gnomon have been discussed in the
Ganita-vilasa. So we stop (now)”.2

The above references show that Makkibhatta’s commentary on
the Maha-Bhaskariya was known as Ganita-vilasa and was a fairly
large work.

In his commentary on the Siddhanta-sekhara Gi.32), Makkibhatta
illustrates a rule by taking 4478 as the number of years elapsed since
the beginning of Kaliyuga. The year 4478 of the Kali era corresponds
to 1377 A.D. and probably denotes the time of writing that commentary.
The Ganita-vilasa must have been written prior to that date.

This Makkibhatta was the same person as his namesake, the
author of a commentary on the Raghuvamsa?

5. Paramesyara’s Siddhanta.dipika

We have already noticed Govinda-syami’s commentary on the
Maha-Bhiskaviya. Parameévara’s Siddhinta-dipika aims at explaining
the meaning of Govinda-svami's commentary. Both Govinda-svami’s
commentary and Paramegvara’s Siddhanta-dipika have been edited by
T.S. Kuppanna Sastri and published in Madras Government Oriental
Series (No. CXXX) by Government Oriental Manuscripts Library,
Madras (1957),

Parameégvara is the well-known Kerala astronomer who wrote
a large number of works. He lived on the confluence of the river
Nila and the sea. At one place in the Siddhanta-dipika he writes :
“When the ahargana was equal to 1655130, the solar eclipse was seen
at Gokarna, but it was not seen here at the confluence of Nila and the
sea.*S According to a passage quoted from Nilakantha’s commentary
on the Aryabhativa in his preface to the Goladipika by T. Ganapati
Sastri, Paramegvara was born in the village called Agvattha.4 This

—_—_—_—_

 

1, yaar anamed oaghisaed = afiafaae sofesa-
faeqrzrma 1 See comm. on SiSe, iv. 1.

2. See P.K. Gode, Studies in Indian Literary History, vol. I,
Pp. 410-16.

3. See MBh, ed. T.S. Kuppanna Sastri, p. 329.

4. The passage is : mRaeqatasit unta: qtaeac: faguadtfienat
"mz 1

--- Page 98 ---
xciv INTRODUCTION

village was situated on the northern bank of the river Nila near the
Arabian sea, and has been identified with modern Alatttir in Kerala.
Reference to the village Aévattha is also made by Paramegvara in his
commentary on the Laghu-Bhaskariya (i. 33) where that village is said
to be situated at a distance of 18 yojanas towards the west of the
Hindu prime meridian (the meridian of Ujjain). In the Siddhanta-
dipika, too, ParameSvara writes that his village was 18 yojanas
to the west of the Hindu prime meridian. It is also stated there
that the Rsine of latitude of his village was 647’, which shows
that Paramegvara lived in latitude 10°50’ N, approximately. The same
latitude is also mentioned in three examples setin the Goladipika
of Paramegvara.

From the above considerations, it is evident that Paramegvara,
author of the Siddhanta-dipika, belonged to the Kerala country in
South India, He lived in the village Aévattha (modern Alattir),
situated on the north bank of the river Nila (called Bharatappuzha in
Malayalam) near the Arabian seashore. The latitude of that village
was 10°50’ N, and longitude 18 yojanas west of the Hindu prime
meridian.

The date of composition of the Siddhanta-dipika is not mentioned
in that work. In the fifth chapter, however, Paramegvara tells us that
the first eclipse observed by him occurred in the Saka year 1315, i.e.,
1393 A.D. Thercafter, he observed several eclipses both of the Sun
and the Moon. Of these eclipses, the last one occurred in ahargana
1655662, i.e, in 1431 A.D. The Siddhanta-dipika, therefore, must
have been written sometime after 1431 A.D.

In the Siddhanta-dipika, Parame$vara has not only elucidated
and explained the text of the Bhaskar ya-bhasya, but has also supple-
mented it by fresh and up-to-date material. It is noteworthy that the
additional matter is generally put in verse. There are references to

 

 

1, afemy a cesar cary acTTATS TAT Ut
aatar aa: Treat araascztay frat 1
See MBh, ed. T.S. Kuppanna Sastri, p. 322.

2. See vv. 209, 212, and 231. For other references, see Para-
megvara’s commentaries on SuSi, iii. 12 and on LMa, Triprasnadhyaya,
9, Here Parameévara also says that the equinoctial midday shadow
for his place is 2 angulas and 18 vyangulas.

--- Page 99 ---
SCHOLIASTS OF BHASKARA gy

unknown writers, but their views are expressed by Parameévara in
self-constructed verses. Quotations from the writings of anterior
writers are given at a very few places. Amongst the works quoted
are the Aryabhatiya, the Surya-siddhanta, the Laghumanasa, and
the Daivajiia-bhisana. Reference is also made to the Parahita. . The
places Gokarna and Navaksetra are mentioned. The latter was the
region where Paramesgvara lived.1

Reference to and extracts from the Siddhanta-dipika (or
Péaramesvara-bhasya) are found to occur in Nilakantha’s commentary
on the Aryabhatiya. In a lengthy colophon at the end of the Ganita-
pada in the latter work, Nilakantha tells us that he acquired knowledge
of astronomy from Damodara, son of Paramegvara, author of the

Drgganita. The author of the Drgganita was the same Parameévara
as the author of the Siddhanta-dipika?

K. Sambagiva Sastri and the author of Keraliya Samskrta
Sahitya Caritram identified the above Damodara with the author of
the astrological work Muhurtabharana,2 but K. Mahadeva Sastri has
proved that identification to be incorrect.‘

From the evidence furnished by the other works of Paramegvara
we learn that he was a pupil of Rudra and belonged to Bhrgu gotra.
6. Paramesvara’s Karmadipika

Paramegvara’s Karmadipika is his independent commentary on
the Maha-Bhaskariya. This has been edited by B.D. Apte and
published in Anandasrama Sanskrit Series (No. 126).

From the third opening stanza of the commentary and the
colophons at the ends of the chapters, we learn that the name of the

 

1. See his comm. on LBA, iii. 2-3.

2. For, Nilakantha in his commentary on A, iii. 22-25, quotes
a passage from Paramesvara’s commentary on the Laghu-Bhaskariva
and refers to Parameévara, and in the same connection states that
Parameévara’s son was his teacher.

_ _ 3. See Introduction to Aryabhatiyam (Ganita-pada) with
Nilakantha’s commentary, edited by K. Sambasiva Sastri, Trivandrum
Sanskrit Series, Trivandrum.

4. See A Descriptive catalogue of Sanskrit manuscripts in
Curator’s Office Library, Trivandrum, edited by K. Mahadeva Sastri,
vol. V, 1939, Preface.

--- Page 100 ---
xevi

infRODUCTION

commentary is Karma-dipika and that its author is Paramesvara.
This Parameévara is the same person as the author of the Siddhanta-
dipika noticed above, for at two placest in the commentary he
refers to the Bhaskartya-bhasya-vyakhya (i.e., Siddhanta-dipika) and
calls it his owa work.

The date of composition of the Karma-dipika is not mentioned

anywhere in that work, but reference in it to the Siddhanta-dipika

shows

says :

that it was written subsequent to that work.

Regarding the scope of the Karma-dipika, the commentator

“Farlier, in the Bhaskariya-bhayya-vyakhya (i.e. Siddhanta-
dipixa) 1 have explained to deiaii the astronomical processes
with reference to the celestial sphere. Now, for an understanding
of the astronomical processes only by the dull-witted, I write
this Karma-dipika, which is a brief exposition of the text
of the same work (ise., the Maha-Bhaskars ya).’”

“This exposition is set out for understanding the astronomical
processes (stated in the Maha-Bhaskariya) only by those who
are not qualified to go through the bhasya.”’8

The verse occurring at the end of the Karma-dipika, after the

colophon, shows that Paramesvara was the author of the following
works, called dipixa :

1. Muhartastaka-dipixa. (Untraced so far)

2. Siddhanta-dipika. Noticed above.

3. Vakya-dipika. This is the Astanga-hydaya-vyakhya (Vakya-
pradipika). A manuscript of this work occurs in the
Government Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras.4 The
colophon at the end of the sixteenth chapter runs :
fa Maritaareacaaarlaat qzaatemiant HATaTACST sy
qaaeareniat aaasatasat fazraeaid Temisewa: AACA: |
This shows that the author of the Vakya-pradipika is

ee

MBh,

1. See the opening stanza of the commentary and comm. on
1, 52.

2. Second and third opening stanzas of the commentary.
3. Concluding stanza of the commentary.
4. Ms. No. R 3266.

--- Page 101 ---
SCHOLIASTS Of BHASKARA evil

the same Parameévara as the author of the Siddhanta-
dipika.
4. Bha-dipika. Untraced so far.

5. Nyaya-dipika. Thisisthe same as Grahana-nyaya-dipika,
edited with English translation by K.V. Sarma. (VI. Series,
No. 35).

6. Karma-dipika. Noticed above.

7. Gola-dipika. Paramesvara wrote two works bearing this
title, both dealing with the celestial sphere. One has
been edited by T. Ganapati Sastri (Trivandrum Sanskrit
Series, No. 49) and the other with English translation by
K.V. Sarma (Adyar Library, Madras, 1957).

8. Bhata-dipika. This is Paramesvara’s commentary on
the Aryabhatiya. This has been edited by H. Kern
(Leiden, 1874).

Amongst other works on astronomy written by Parameévara,
mention may be made of the following: (9) Drgganita, (10) Grahana-
mandana, (11) Grehanastaka, (12) Vakya-kerana, (13) Laghu-manasa-
vyakhya, (14) Laghu-Bhaskariya-yyakhyana, (15) Surya-siddhanta-
vivarana, (16) Lilavati-vivarana, (17) Goladipika-yrtti, and
(8) Vyatipatastaka-prtti.

82. Commentaries on the Laghu-Bhaskariya
1. Saikaranarayana’s commentary

This commentary has been edited by P.K. Narayana Pillai and
published in Trivandrum Sanskrit Series (No. 162). From the colophons
at the ends of the chapters, we learn that the name of this commentary
is Bhaskariya-yiyarana and that its author is Sankaranarayana.

In the commentary on verses 4-6 of the third chapter, the
commentator gives the times of rising of the zodiacal signs for his
local place, and also mentions the names of the place and state (rastra)
to which he belonged. He writes :

“Here, by us in the Paighya-rastra at Kollapuri, the times in
Pranas (respirations)! of rising of the signs, as calculated from

 

 

1. 6 praénas are equal to 1 sidereal minute of time.

A. Bh. 13

--- Page 102 ---
zeviii tNTRODUCTION

the equinoctial midday shadow of 15 (yavas), are read in verse
in the katapayadi notation (as follows) :

dhamasgaya (1559), bhinnachaga (1704), rdhalijjaya (1899),
kathandhiyam (1971), modajayah (1885), padarthakam (1781)
—these in direct and inverse orders are the times of rising of the
signs beginning with Aries at Kollapuri.”

The equinoctial midday shadow at Kollapuri given above, viz.,
15 yevas (=1 angula and 7 yavas), as also the times of rising of the
signs stated above, correspond to the latitude 8°53’ N. The same
latitude is mentioned in an example set by the commentator in the
same chapter (under verses 30-33).

It has not been possible to identify the Paighya-rastra mentioned
in the above passage, but there is no doubt that this rastra was on
the Malabar coast in South India and formed part of Kerala, or was
Kerala itself. For, the commentator mentions the Kerala country at
more than one place in the commentary. On one occasion, he describes
that country as “the country surrounded by beautiful seashore.” At
several places in the commentary, mention is made of $ri Ravivarma-
deva Kulagekhara, King of Kerala who ruled from Mahodayapura (near
Cochin). The use of the Malabar forms of the aksarapalhi numerals in
the eighth chapter in the commentary further proves the commentator’s
connection with that country.

From the above it is clear that the commentator Sankaranarayana
hails from the Kerala country in South India. His native place
Kollapuri was the same as modern Quilon (latitude 8°53'28’' N., and
longitude 76°36’59" E). Quilon is a town and port in Quilon District,
Kerala State (South India). In ancient times it was a seat of Sanskrit
learning, and a town and port of great importance."

 

 

 

1. Quilon is mentioned by Ptolemy under the names Koilam,
Coilam, and Elangkon Emporium. “It is one of the oldest towns
on the (Malabar) coast. ... The ancient history of Quilon goes back to
the records of the primitive Syrian Church in India. It was for
long one of the greatest ports of Malabar, and is mentioned as
Coilon in a letter to the Nestorian Petriarch, Jesujebus of Adiabene,
died 660 A.D. It appears in Arabic as early as 851 A.D., under the
name Kaulam-Mall, when it was already frequented by ships from
China ; and during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries it continued
to be the great port of trade in Malabar with China and Arabia. It is
the Coilam of Marco Polo ; and the Columbum of several ecclesiastical

--- Page 103 ---
SCHOLIASTS OF BHASKARA xcix

In the commentary on verses 4-8 of the first chapter, the
commentator writes :
“When so many years (i. e., 3179) of Kaliyuga had elapsed,
there was an emperor called Sakendra, who, in the lands
(conquered by him), for the sake of self-renown, got the
subsequent years of Kaliyuga associated with his name. So
that (association) is remembered by the astronomers and the
succession of their pupils and pupils’ pupils. In this way the

i

Saka years (elapsed) now are known to us to be 791.”

The Saka year 791 (elapsed) corresponds to 869 A.D., and denotes
the time when this commentary was written.

Again, in the commentary on verses 31-32 of the fourth chapter,
the commentator writes :

“When 14,49,066 days had elapsed (of Kaliyuga) and the Sun

was eclipsed, causing darkness in the afternoon, Sri Kulasekhara,

the lord of the land surrounded by beautiful seashore, enquired

of the eclipsed portion of the Sun corresponding to the end of

the second ghati since the commencement of the eclipse.”

The epoch mentioned in this Passage corresponds to Sunday, June 16,
866 A.D. The eclipse mentioned in this passage, therefore, occurred
three years before Sankaranarayana wrote the commentary.

Sankaranarayana was a contemporary and favourite of King
Ravivarma-deva Kulagekhara of Kerala. It is also probable that he
was the court astronomer of that king. From the numerous references
to that king in the commentary, we learn that he belonged to the solar
race and that his capital was at Mahodayapura (modern Kotungalloor
near Cochin, according to K.V. Sarma). There was also an observatory
at Mahodayapura, and Sankaranarayana was probably in charge of
that observatory. Regarding the age of that king, Sankaranarayana
makes the following passing reference :}

_——.

 

 

writers of that age, one of whom, Friar Jordanus,. was consecrated
Bishop of Columbun, cire. 1330 A.D. It was an emporium for pepper,
brazil wood, and ginger, the best kind of which was known till late in
the middle ages as Columbine ginger. Kaulam was an important place
down to the beginnin g of the sixteenth century when Varthema speaks
of it asa fine port, and Barbosa as ‘a very great city with many great
merchants, Moors, and Gentoos, whose ships trade to all the Eastern
ports, as far as Bengal, Pegu, and the Archipelago’. (The Imperial
Gazetteer of India, vol. XI, p. 339).

1. See comm. on LBh, vii. 9-10.

--- Page 104 ---
i INTRODUCTION

war wsafenfarnfordtartt tare |

“Twenty-five years have elapsed of His Majesty.”

This suggests that the king was born or enthroned in 844 A.D., ie,
twenty-five years before the commentary was written.

The following passage occusring in the commentary suggests
that sometime during these twenty-five years of kingship, King
Ravivarma-deva had to launch an invasion on some other king who
was not on good terms with him:

“With a view to proceed on a campaign at night in order to
vanquish the enemy, after having learnt his whereabouts from
the spies, King (Ravi-)Varmadeva of the solar race, said :°*2

The present commentary explains and illustrates the rules given
in the text, but does not go into the details of rationale, etc. The
commentator uses alphabetical, word, and also aksarapa!li notations
for expressing numbers. In the chronograms formed with alphabets or
‘words, the arrangement is from right to left: but in those in the eksara-
palli notation, the arrangement is both right to left and left to right.
It is remarkable that all number-chronograms (formed with aksarapallt
numerals), stated under viii. 17, proceed from right to left, whereas
those stated under viii. 18 proceed from left to right. Rules of sandhi
have also been followed. Thus (under verse 17):

nna tha* nna nopa denotes 32202
skra na pra pra pra haha skranya denotes 346688814

and (under verse 18) :

nna jhra denotes 25

hina gra ha nna denotes 2712

na pra ha nnna na dre nna denotes 1863192

nnya gra nua ha nya pra skra denotes 3726384

jhra skra nna skra na nna na nna denotes 5424 revs, 1 sign,
21° 2°

(na=1, nna=2, nna or nya or nnya=3, skra=4, jhra=5, |
ha==6, gra=7, pra=8, dre=9, ma=10, tha=20, la=30, pta=40,
ba=50, tra=60, tru=70, cha=80, na=90, and fia= 100)

1 wait aarad feygaaad adarta wm

aitataf fafeear vagacfaar vita ary |

2. In place of tha, the mss. read an It seems that ha denotes

ha
zero (0) and nna denotes 20.

--- Page 105 ---
SCHOLIASTS OF BHASKARA ci

Use of place-value notation with eksarapal/i numerals is an
interesting and noteworthy feature of the commentary.

Sankaranardyana is a great follower and admirer of Aryabhata I.
In matters of controversy, he has preferred to follow the teachings of
Aryabhata I rather than the doctrines laid down in the Vedanta and the
Puranas. At one place,’ he writes :

“That the Moon moves beyond the Sun is mentioned in the
Vedanta and Itihasa (=Purana), etc.; it is not the teaching
of Aryabhata. Discarding what Aryabhata has written, we will
not have access to them.”

Acarya Aryabhata has been mentioned in the commentary on
several occasions and about nine stanzas have been quoted from his
Aryabhatiya. Two verses in arya metre,? not found in the Aryabhatiya
or in the Maha-siddhanta of Aryabhata II (c. 950 A.D.) but available
in the Karona-ratna of Deva (689 A D.), are ascribed to Aryabhata I.
It is probable that they belonged to the Aryabhata-siddhanta, the
lost work of Aryabhata I.

Other writers quoted in the commentary are Varahamihira,
Prabhakara, Sumati, Govinda and Haridatta. Acarya Prabhakara
has been quoted (under LBh, ii. 29) in connection with the
so-called pata ; the quotation seems to be from some astrological
work of that author. Acarya Sumati has been quoted (under LBh,
iv. 15) in connection with eclipses. Sumati is the author of two works
on astronomy; (1) Sumati-mahétentra, and (2) Sumati-karana.
Manuscripts of the former are available in the British Museum and
in Nepal; a photostat copy of the former occurs in the Lucknow
University collection. These works are incomplete and are written in
mixed Sanskrit and Nepali in old devanagari script. Govinda, called
Acarya Bhatta Govinda, Govindacirya, and also simply Govinda, in
the commentary, is, as already shown, the same person as Govinda-
svami, the author of the Mah&@-Bhdskariya-bhasya. Sankaranarayana
has quoted from his work Govinda-krti on three occasions.? These
quotations relate to both mathematics and astronomy, and suggest that,
like the Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta and the Siddhanta-sekhara, this work
of Govinda dealt with both mathematics and astronomy. From a

 

i. See comm. on LBA, iv. 3.
2. Quoted in the commentary on LBA, it. 22,

3. Comm. on ii. 2-3, iv. 9 and viii. 18.

--- Page 106 ---
chi INTRODUCTION

remark made by Sankaranarayana, it appears that the Govinda-kyti
was written as a sequel to the Arjobhatiya2 Reference to Bhatta
Govinda and quotations from his work occur also in Udayadivakara’s
commentary on the Lagku-Bhaskariya and Sankara’s commentary on
the Li/avati. It is interesting to note that all these quotations are in the
arya metre. Acarya Haridatta, quoted in the commientary, is the
same person as the author of the Graha-cara-nibandhana,? for the
three verses ascribed to him are found to occur in that work.3

Quotations from the Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta and the Khanda-
khadyaka also occur in the commentary, and the latter work is
mentioned by name. The Brhad-Bhaskariya of Bhaskaral is also
mentioned and quoted. ,

2. Udayadivakara’s commentary, Sundari

Manuscripts of this commentary are available at Trivandrum
and a transcript in the Lucknow University Library. The beginning and
end of it are as follows :

Beginning : meat THTAMTATARAT ATT:
ara MaaeAaAaa AAA |
aqMERey TENT TEAAAT
avaen facgaati faata feared 1

Colophon: - fa wAfafenngetrgaafearatiachaaat Aqarentta-
faqat qragfaararat aeamfa: seaetseara: |

End : ud ga: gaulaaaissttasteontrarat walt earartatt |

Colophon : afa aaarentiafaaat gray faaraat aaa TaTeATT-
SATAISCEA:

From the colophons at the ends of the chapters, itis clear that
the name of the commentary (ivrti) is Sundari, and that its author is
Bhatta Udayadivakara.

1. Sankaranarayana’s remark is : sea (areAdta)eeaea ae
wgntfarecfa atiaeagzat softaq 1 See comm. on LBh, ii. 2-3,
2. This work has been edited by K.V. Sarma, (Madras, 1954).

3. The three verses are GCN, iii. 26-28 (a-b).

--- Page 107 ---
SCHOLIASTS OF BHASKARA eit

There is no reference in the commentary to the time or place
of the commentator. At one place,’ however, the commentator cites
an example where he states the aharguna (‘the number of civil days
elapsed since the beginning of Kaliyuga’) for the 10th tithi, Vaisakha,
light half (Suk/a-paksa), Saka year 995. his epoch corresponds to
Friday, April 19, 1073 A.D. It is usual to give the ahargana for the
current date. So weinfer that this commentary was written about the
year 1073 of the Christian era.

This commentary is of immense historical interest, as it is in
this commentary that we, for the first time, come across the name of the
well-known Hindu mathematician Sridharacdrya and quotations from
his work on arithmetic and mensuration. Moreover, this is the earliest
work which throws light on the Hindu algebraist Acarya Jayadeva, whose
works are now lost. Quotations from his work, occurring in the
commentary, relate to the solution of the indeterminate equation of the
second degree (called varga-prakrti or ‘square-nature’), viz., Nx*?+[=y’.
The rules attributed to him include the cyclic method (called cakravala),
for determining the integral solution of that equation. The name
‘cakravala’ is also mentioned. The credit of the first inception of the
cyclic method has hitherto been given to the twelfth century
mathematician Bhaskara JI (1150 A.D.), though he himself did not
claim originality for that method but tacitly ascribed it to earlier
authors. Jayadeva may or may not have been its inventor, but
quotations from his work are the earliest sources of our information
regarding that method. Extracts from Jayadeva’s work contain alsoa
method for obtaining the solution of the equation Nx?+C=y%. This
method is different from the known methods, though not superior
to them.

Another interesting feature of the commentary is the
commentator’s method for solving the multiple equations :
x+y=a perfect square
x—y=a perfect square
xy+1l=a perfect square.
This method, though inferior to those given by Brahmagupta

(628 A.D.) and Narayana (1356 A.D.), deserves attention because of the
ingenuity displayed by the author. It also shows that Udayadivakara

 

 

 

1. Comm. on ii. 29,

--- Page 108 ---
civ INTRODUCTION

knew full well how to tackle and solve the general indeterminate
equation of the second degree of the type ax tox te =ytl

Other authors quoted in the commentary are Garga, Aryabhata,
Bhatta Govinda and Bhatta Brahmagupta. Reference is also made to
Paulisa, Vasistha, Lata, and Prabhakaracarya. Quotations from the
Brhajjatuka of Varahamihira, the Maha- Bhaskariya of Bhaskara I and
from other anonymous sources are also found to occur.

Reference to this commentary is made by Nilakantha (1500 A.D.)
in his commentary on the Aryabhatiya. Nilakantha has referred
to this commentary as Laghu-Bhaskariva-vyathya Sundari, and has
quoted two stanzas from it.2 Quotations from this commentary occur
also in Sahkara’s cominentary on the Lilavari, the passages quoted,
being Jayadeva’s verses pertaining to the ‘square-nature’ (varga-prakrti)
and Udayadivakara’s interpretations on them.

3. Paramiesvara’s commentary

Parameévara’s commentary on the Laghu-Chaskariva (called
Laghu-Bhaskariya-yyakhya or Laghu-Bhaskariya-vyakhyéna) was edited
and published in 1946 by B.D. Apte in Anandasrama Sanskrit Series,
Poona.

Paramegvara, the commentator of the Laghu-Bhaskariya, is the
Same person as the author of the Siddhanta-dipika, His date and
place have already been discussed. In this commentary, he mentions
Navaksetra and the village Agvattha to which he belonged.’ He gives
also the latitude and longitude of that place

In the commentary on verse 16 of the second chapter, Parameé-
vara gives the amount of precession of the equinoxes for the Saka year
1330. This Saka year corresponds to 1408 A.D, and indicates the
time of writing the commentary.

rr re me nr

1. For details see K.S. Shukla, ‘Acdrya Jayadeva, the mathe-
matician’, Ganita, vol. 5, no. 1, 1954.

2. In the comm. on A, ii, 17 (c-d).

3. Comm. on LBA, i. 33 and iii, 2-3.
4. Comm. on LBh, iii. 2-3,

--- Page 109 ---
SCHOLIASTS OF BHASKARA ew

The commentary under consideration is the earliest composition
of Paramegvara! and was written when he was yet a student. In the
concluding stanzas of the commentary, he says :

“For the benefit of the dull-witted, the meaning of the Bhaskariya
has been briefly set forth by me, who is (still) in the service of
the lotus-feet of the teacher.

The activities ofan intoxicated elephant anda young antelope
are both witnessed ; so my endeavour is also in the fitness
of things.”

The commentary aims at explaining the meaning of the Laghu-
Bhaskariya in brief, but gives the rationale of the rules also, There
are also quotations from earlier works, such as_ the Aryabhatiya, Maha-
Bhaskariya, Khanda-khadyaka, Govinda-krti, Laghu-manasa, Siddhanta-
Sekhara, Lilavati, Bhusana, etc. The last mentioned work seems to be
the same as Daivajiia-bhusana mentioned in the Siddhdnta-dipika. The
commentary, though written at an early age, is an excellent exposition
of the Laghu-Bhaskariya.

Nilakantha (1500 A.D.), in his commentary on the Aryabhatiya
(ili. 22-.5), refers to this commentary as Paramesvara-vyakhyana, and
quotes from it.

4. Commentary Vivarana in Old Malayalam?

Four commentaries in Malayalam on the LBh have been identi-
fied, of which the earliest and the most important is the one in
Old Malayalam preserved in a single manuscript (No. 946) in the
Maharajah’s Palace Library Collection, Trivandrum. This commentary
commences with a benedictory verse in Sanskrit :

wtaa(Caqaafadt qaa(ad) aeTA(eA. FAT) 1
quater FeANaa: Al wag areadt Fat

——

 

1. See the opening stanza of Paramegvara’s comm. on the
Sarya-siddhanta.

2. The information on this commentary and on the three

Malayalam commentaries described below has been supplied by
K.V. Sarma.

A. Bh. 14

--- Page 110 ---
evi INTRODUCTION

The commentary proper begins thus :

(atenera aaetey etc. text) : gfaq weg 1 aacrarfiadazar:
weet weq ela aardafia-qifser 3 0¢ gaztenlg freq afaqn-
waeaey | gealagradad, TaMgar: wae teae 1

Unfortunately the available Manuscript of this extensive
commentary extends only up to chapter Three. The colophons to the
different chapters read :

Ch. I: iti LaghubhasRariye Prathamo’dhyayah |
IL: iti Laghubhaskariya-vivarane dvitiyo’dhyayah |
I: itt Laghubhaskariya-vivarane triprasnadhyayas
irtiyo dhyayah |

The language of the commentary is akin to Tamil, but exhibits
linguistic peculiarities which distinguish Old Malayalam from Tamil.
Apart from elucidating the text, the commentary contains a large
number of illustrative examples which serve to demonstrate the
enunciations in the text. The date of the commentary is known from
the Kali day (ahargana) which the author chooses to compute the mean
planets under LBh, i. 14-17, being 1589617, corresponding to Saka 1173,
Mesa 13, Friday, in A.D, 1251.

While the name of the author cannot be ascertained, the place
where he lived and wrote the commentary is known, being Madurai,
in present-day Tamilnad, For, under LBh, iii. 1-3, after describing the
gnomon, the commentator proceeds to illustrate the calculation of the
latitude for Madurai from the gnomonic shadow, and derives it as
9° 28’. The same latitude is derived also from another example under
IBA, iii. 33, but without the indication of the name of the place.

The wide reading of the commentator is evidenced by the
wealth of quotations from a large number of works cited to corroborate
his comments. Besides the more common authorities like Aryabhata,
Brahmagupta, Strya-siddhanta, Patica-siddhantika, Ratna-kosa,
Siddhanta-sekhara and Ratna-mala, some comparatively obscure
texts like Siddhanta-tilaka and Sarva-siddhi, are also found quoted.
Anumber of quotations are given anonymously. The commentary
Sundari by Udayadivakara on the LBh also comes in for quotation.
The available manuscript is, as already stated, incomplete and
extends only up to the end of the third chapter, though at two places,

under iii, 15 and 20, the commentator refers to his commentary on
ch, vi.

--- Page 111 ---
SCHOLIASTS OF BHASKARA cvii

5. Anonymous commentary in Malayalam

The Kerala University Oriental Research Institute and Mss.
Library, Trivandrum, possesses the palmleaf manuscript of an anony-
mous commentary on LBh in later-day Malayalam prose, being Ms.
No. 5157. A portion of the work towards the beginning is missing and
the manuscript commences from a portion of the commentary on LBh,
i. 9 with the words :

veo gefiaamega agfart amesa i frags: APATHT-
TaifraneTeheasat:

The ms. contains the complete commentary for the rest of the
work and ends : agafita-wedgead frat dalton wrentatea wleerter
afasq t sft arena aezatseaTa: |

6. Balasankaram by Sankaran Nampitiri (b. 1494 A.D.)

Another Malayalam commentary on the LBh available in
manuscript form in the said Kerala University Library (No. C. 2146-A)
is the Balasankaram of Sahkaran Nampttiri of the Mahisamangalam
family. This lucid exposition of LBh commences with an. obeisance
followed by three introductory verses :

Ue ATMA IG TAHITI
qatrgag Fy ard

mzacrgedina tong |

aaa afmaseg aTeaTy

aeaafag gram Fu
aratat eH aTea afageare aterary 1
aimatass afta faaaten aeray 1
weary amedtes Je a TAT |
wettatgaa =| -yTeH Tra faaedreg ui
In the last verse, the author pays obeisance to his teacher

Paramegvara. The names of the author, his teacher and the commen-
tary are mentioned also in the colophon to ch. 1:

col. : (zisaz-fog faa Tey farfadt ayweste-areny
TAIZ AT qaatseaT: |

--- Page 112 ---
eviii INTRODUCTION

Some personal details about the author are available in the
introductory verses to his work on Sanskrit grammar entitled Ruapa-
nayana-paddhati :

are gear aectiart afera yar |
‘qraise gagqed’sie we a TSTAT U
afm aaniaa ta carseat |
QETaAAAraAG aTAHA Fat ui

aalat cara wefarag vat afe wraay 1
acarg fartedtad fagfgataneat:

Sankaran Nampttiri, belonged to the scholarly family of
Mahisamangalam settled at Valligrama (Mal. Vallikkunnu) at Puru-
vana (Mal. Peruvanam), near Trichur in Central Kerala. His teacher
was Parameévara who is identified with a well-known astrologer of the
family of Vazhamaveli at Chengannoor. It is he who is referred
to by the expression ‘ente Vazhaméavelikku namaskaram’ at the beginn-
ing of the commentary (see above p. cvii). The author was born on
Kali day 1678168 represented by the chronogram jatoyam hamsatulye
expressed in the katapavadi notation, corresponding to A.D. 1494. He
had a flair for writing elucidatory works on Jyotisa, both in astronomy
and astrology, in simple Malayalam. His original works include
Ganitasara, Candraganitakrama, Ayanacalanadiganita, Jatakasara,
Jatakakrama, Kaladipaka and. Prasnamala. He has also written
commentaries in Malayalam on Patcabodha, Kaladipaka and Muhiarta-
padavi, all under the name Balasankaram as in the case of Laghu-
bhaskariya. We is also said to have compiled a ‘Register of muhurtas
for 1000 years’.

7. Another anonymous comm. in Malayalam

The fourth Malayalam commentary on the ZBh preserved in
the said Kerala Univ. Library is also anonymous, and begins with the
following five introductory verses :

veeiiqaian fart aay ArT |
afattadesss GFAKHe TTT
ACMPFIAETATZRS HAT YaTRSAT |
TaarraTigay Geaeie faBEeH |

--- Page 113 ---
SOMESVARA cix

saasiftay franferee gutaterg arfea |
MYM AAG Ffacararse BATH AAT 11

alfgefgten fefeag tc fact facnfar |
sfagses aaa qeaga fasege
gieacz ancane yrenilafaacder 1
me afters Wega areata at

*

The commentary proper commences thus :

afat WEE, aay asikemtizfeage qafag ute
fact Herd aneqnzafanifaanter geetaaanentta Wey

The manuscript is complete and closes with the colophon :
eefer cazt aca afasy |

The language smacks of mediaeval Malayalam and the work may
be two or three hundred years old.

9, SOMESVARA

Having thus noticed the life and works of Bhaskara I and his
scholiasts, we now turn to Some$vara whose commentary on the
Aryabhatiya has been utilized in the present edition in completing the
missing portion towards the end of Bhaskara I’s commentary. This
has been done because Someévara’s commentary is really a summary of
Bhaskara I’s commentary and it contains what Bhaskara I had written,
though in a concise form.

SomeSvara belongs to the school of Aryabhata I. Up till now
only two works written by him are known to us, yiz., (1) his
commentary on the Aryabhatiya, and (2) his commentary on the
Khanda-khadyaka of Brahmagupta.

The latter work is not actually available. It has been mentioned
by Amaraja (c. 1200 A.D.) who himself wrote a commentary on the
Khanda-khadyaka. Amaraja mentions the name of Somegvara amongst
the earlier commentators of the Khanda-khadyaka whose works were
consulted by him in writing his own. In the second opening stanza of
his commentary on the Khanda-khadyaka, Amaraja writes :

“Having carefully studied the commentaries (bhasya) (on the
Khanda-khadyaka) written by Lalla, Utpala, and Somegvara,

--- Page 114 ---
cx INTRODUCTION

and combining the meanings given by them, I set forth the same
briefly for the sake of the delight (of the readers).”’?

In the course of the commentary of Amaraja too, we find the names
of Lalla and his Khanda-khadyaka-paddhati and Sisya-dhi-vyddhida
and also the name of Bhattotpala and quotations from his
commentary, but we do not have any reference to Someévara or his
commentary.

However, the above statement of Amaraja itself is of great
significance. Jt shows that chronologically Some§$vara comes next to
Bhattotpala. At the same time, he lived anterior to Amaraja. From
the closing stanza of Bhattotpala’s commentary on the Khanda-
khadyaka, we learn that Bhattotpala had completed that commentary
“on Thursday, fifth zithi, in the light half of the month of Caitra, in
Saka year 890 (or 968 A.D.).”2 We also know that Amaraja lived
about 1200 A.D., for his teacher Trivikrama adopts 1180 A.D. as the
epoch of calculation in one of his works. So Someévara must have
lived somewhere between 968 A.D. and 1200 A.D.

As regards the place of Somegvara, nothing can be said definitely.
But it seems that his works were generally studied in Gujarat,
for, Amaraja who admits to have studied his commentary, lived at
Anandapura,! which has been identified by Cunningham® and Dey®
with the town of Vadnagar in northern Gujarat situated to the
south-east of Sidhpur (lat. 23°45 N, long. 72°39 E). Anandapura
was a great seat of Sanskrit learning. Astronomer Vatesvara
(b. 880 A.D.), the celebrated author of the Vatesyara-siddhanta and
the Karanasara, and Mahadeva (1263 A.D.), the commentator of
the Ratna-mala of Sripati (c. 1039 A. D.), belonged to this very

 

1, aeaterrataeaclactaaareaifon aca Tea
ualger cad quia data 77

2, qanaer gsarat faarat yearaz |
aaarcefad ark sad faafodar
See Amaraja’s commentary, p. 20.

4. This is evident from Amaraja’s references to Anandapura.
See pp. 94 and 87 of his commentary.

5. See The ancient geography of India, p. 416.

6. See The geographical dictionary of ancient and mediaeval
India, p. 6,

--- Page 115 ---
PRESENT EDITION ext

place. According to Amaraja! and Mahadeva,? a gnomon of 12
digits at Anandapura cast a shadow of 5} digits at midday at an
equinox. The latitude of Anandapura was therefore 24° approximately.
The latitude of Vadnagar is also approximately the same. Thus
whereas Amaraja lived in northern Gujarat at Vadnagar, Dayarama,
the scribe of the manuscript of SomeSvara’s commentary on the
Aryabhatiya, which is available to us, lived in southern Gujarat at
Ahmedabad. Dayarama has himself stated this fact in his post colo-
phonic statement at the end of Somegvara’s commentary.

In his commentary on the Aryabhatiya, Someévara does not
throw any light on himself or his works. But the following definitions
agzient wae dit: and setgagivtiea gH: quoted in the commentary
are exactly the same as enunciated by Sridhara (c. 900 A.D.) in his
Trisatika. Similarly, a few mathematical examples, too, occurring in
the commentary seem to be based on those of Sridhara. This shows
that Somesgvara lived posterior to Sridhara (¢. 990 A.D.}, which is in
agreement with what has been said above.

10. PRESENT EDITION OF BHASKARA I’S COMMENTARY

101. Manuscripts used

The present edition of Bhaskara I’s commentary is based on the
following five manuscripts :

A No. 18063 of the Kerala University Oriental Research Institute
and Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum. Substance—Palm-leaf.
Character—-Malayalam. Size —144" x 13”. Extent—92 leaves, 11
lines per page, 66 letters per line. Incomplete: contains Gitika-
pada, Ganita-pada, Kalakriya-pada, and Gola-pada up to vs. 6,
breaking off abruptly in the course of the comments on that
verse. Geometrical figures neatly drawn. Writing—neat and
readable, but having errors, omissions and gaps.

B No. T 368, a modern transcript of the Kerala University Oriental

Research Institute and Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum. Same
as Des. Cata. No. 640 of the Curator’s Office Library,
Trivandrum. Substance—Paper. Character—Devanagari. Size—

 

 

1. See his commentary, p. 87.

2. See Bharatiya Jyotisa-sastra (Marathi) by S. B. Diksita,
p. 471,

--- Page 116 ---
éxil

INTRODUCTION

134”x 8’. Extent —362 pages, 20 lines per page, and 16 letters
per line. Incomplete : contains Gitika-pada, Ganita-pada,
Kalakriya-péda, and Gola-pada up to vs. 6, breaking off in
course of the comments on that verse. Writing -neat and
readable, but having errors, omissions and gaps.

Use was actually made of a transcript of this transcript, which
was acquired by the late Dr Bibhutibhushan Datta. This
transcript is in foolscap size and in excellent bold handwriting.

No. 6265 of the India Office Library, London. Substance —Palm-
leaf. Character—Grantha. Size—144” x12”. Extent — 134 leaves,
10 lines per page. Incomplete : contains Gitika-pada, Ganita-
pada, Kalakriya-pada, and Gola-pada up to vs. 6, breaking off
in course of the comments on that verse. Writing —somewhat
carelessly written, and has comparatively more errors, omissions
and gaps.

Use was actually made of a transcript of this manuscript
which was written by Pandit Markandeya Misra, Jyotishacharya,

as dictated by Pandit Mani Sastri at the latter’s residence at
Hanuman Ghat, Varanasi,

No. C. 1752 of the Kerala University Oriental Research Institute
and Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum. Same as Des. Cata. No.
639 of- the Curator’s Office Library, Trivandrum. Substance—
Palm-leaf. Character—Malayalam. Size—22" x2”. Extent—168
leaves, 8 lines per page, and 50-56 letters per linc. Incomplete :
contains Gitika- pada, Ganita-pada, Kélakriya-pada, and
Golapada up to vs. 5, breaking off in the course of the
comments on that verse. Writing—neat and readable, but having
errors, omissions and gaps.

No. 12806 B of the Kerala University Oriental Research Institute
and Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum. Substance—Palm-leaf.
Character—Malayalam. Incomplete : contains Gawita-pada and
Kalakriya-pada up to vs. 12 (comments incomplete).

The above five manuscripts seem to have originated from the

same source. They exhibit generally the same errors and the same

gaps.

Sometimes these gaps are indicated by leaving some blank space,

and sometimes the gaps are not so indicated. The differences that the
manuscripts show are probably due to the personal omission and
commission of the scribes. Of the five manuscripts, A and B were
found to be the best, although D and E, too, proved to be useful

--- Page 117 ---
MANUSCRIPT MATERIAL czili

in filling the gaps at some places. A and C were practically the same
in many respects, except in omissions, which were too many in C.

The above manuscripts being all incomplete, the missing
portion towards the end of Bhiskara I’s commentary was completed by
supplying the relevant portion from Somegvara’s commentary which
claims to be a summary of Bhaskara I’s commentary. The following
manuscript of Somesvara’s commentary was used :

F Bs, 272, Catalogue No. 335, Accession No. 2495 of Bombay
University Library, Bombay. Substance—Thick glazed yellowish
paper. Character—Devanagari. Size—13}"x84". Extent—36
leaves, 15 lines per page and 43 letters per line. Complete, but
extremely defective, and full of inaccuracies and omissions.
Copied by Dayarama of Ahmedabad in 1863 A.D.

10°2. Editorial note

i. Manuscript material

The idea of editing Bhaskara I’s commentary occurred in 1950
when I had only one manuscript at my disposal, viz., the transcript of
Ms. B procured by the late Dr. Bibhutibhushan Datta in 1932. A
study of this manuscript was made and in order to fix the correct and
connected meaning of the text the whole commentary was translated
into Hindi, In this process necessary emendations were made in the
text and the gaps were provisionally filled up. The principle of least
interference was applied; the attempt being to remove the defects in the
manuscripts by making as few alterations as possible. In filling the gaps
and in rectifying the numerical figures, accuracy was the main guiding
principle. With this end in view, the manuscript which was highly
defective had to be read over and over again several times. To verify
the accuracy of ,.the numerical figures, lengthy calculations had to be
made and checked twice. But obscurities still remained and it
was considered desirable to acquire at least one more manuscript of
the work. So Ms. C was procured on loan from the India Office
Library, London, and was got transcribed in Devanagari characters by
Pandit Markandeya Misra at Varanasi with the help of Pandit Mani
Sastri. The fair copy prepared was collated with this transcript
but it did not prove to be of much help, as the transcript of Ms. C was
no better than that of Ms. B, which was already with us. There being
no hope of getting a complete or better manuscript, arrangements were
made to print the commentary as already edited along with its Hindi
A. Bh. 15

--- Page 118 ---
Iziv INTRODUCTION

translation face to face, but certain difficulties having arisen, the
matter was postponed to a later date,

The idea of publishing Bhaskara I’s commentary was revived
when Prof. F.C. Auluck of the Indian National Science Academy,
New Delhi, requested me and Shri K.V. Sarma to prepare an edition of
the Aryabhatiya to be released on the occasion of the 1500th birth
anniversary of Aryabhata I. Shri K.V. Sarma had in his possession two
new manuscripts, Mss. D and E, and he took upon himself the task
of getting the press copy already prepared by me collated with those
manuscripts, A little later, Shri Sarma came across one more manuscript
(Ms. A) in the Kerala University Oriental Research Institute,
Trivandrum, and he collated the Press copy with this manuscript
also. This manuscript proved to be of great use, although Mss. D
and E too were helpful to a certain extent in the rectification of
the press copy. It was now possible to emend the text at some
places, fill up some of the gaps more appropriately and also
Teconstruct some missing verses out of those occurring at the end
of the commentary on the Ganita-pada and issue a fairly satisfactory
edition of the work. A complete manuscript of the commentary,
however, is yet to be traced. ,

Several years ago, I had procured on loan from the Bombay
University Library, Bombay, a manuscript of Someévara’s com-
mentary on the Aryabhatiya and had got it transcribed at Lucknow,
This commentary claims to be a summary of Bhaskara I’s commentary
on the Aryabhatiya. As such, it was considered desirable to complete
Bhaskara I’s commentary by supplying the relevant portion from this
commentary. This work proved to be of extreme difficulty as the
manuscript used in making the transcript was very defective. There
was hardly a word which was correctly spelt. Apart from that, there
were at places unindicated gaps. An attempt has been made to
reconstruct the text as best as posible.

In editing Bhaskara I's commentary and in reconstructing
Somesvara’s commentary, other commentaries on the Aryabhatiya,
such as those of Stryadeva (2. 1191 A.D.), Parameégvara (1431 A.D.),
Yallaya (1480 A.D.), Nilakantha (1500 A.D.) and Raghunatha-raja
(1597 A.D.), have been freely used. The commentary of Raghunatha-
raja proved to be comparatively of greater help. In editing Bhaskara
J’s commentary, the commentary of Someévara was also Of much help.

--- Page 119 ---
EDITORIAL INNOVATIONS exyv

li. Presentation of the Text and Comm.

The text of the Aryabhatiya adopted in the present edition is the
one found in the manuscripts of Bhaskara I’s commentary and
commented upon by Bhaskara I. In the case of the text as well as the
commentary, whenever variations in readings were found to occur in the
different manuscripts used, the readings adopted in the body are those
which were correct and considered to be more appropriate than the
others. The other readings have been shown in the footnotes. In the
case of Somesvara’s commentary incorporated in the present edition,
footnotes have not been given. For, it would have meant the repro-
duction of the whole commentary in the footnotes. Moreover, it
would not have served any purpose.

iii. Editorial innovations

The verses occurring in the text and in the commentary were
not numbered in the manuscripts. The verses of the text occurring
in the various padas have been numbered separately and in the serial
order. Those occurring in the commentary have not been numbered
in this way. Of these verses, only those have been numbered which
contained examples. Examples occurring under different rules have
been numbered separately in the serial order.

Fillings of the gaps and words or phrases inserted from outside
have been enclosed within square brackets. The quotations occurring
in the commentary have been traced, as far as possible, and the refe-
rences have been duly indicated similarly. Only the numbering of the
diagrams in the commentary is left unenclosed. Thus the indications

Parilekha 1, Parilekha 2, etc., did not occur in manuscripts and have
been inserted editorially.

For facility of reference, headings in black antique type have
been provided within square brackets before every new verse commented
upon. Similar headings have been provided also before different topics
discussed in the commentary, wherever necessary. Verses and proper
names occurring in the commentary, too, have been set in antique type
to give them prominence and facilitate reference. For the convenience
of the reader, the chapter-name has been mentioned at the top on the
left hand page and the subject matter under discussion at the top on
the right hand page. The verse number is also mentioned at the top.

--- Page 120 ---
xvi INTRODUCTION

iv. Appendices
Nine Appendices have been given in the end :

I. Examples in the Aryabhatiya-bhasya of Bhaskara L

I, Bhaskara I’s tables for the constant pulveriser ax—canby.
If. Bhaskara I’s terms for the mathematical operations,
IV. Authorities cited by Bhaskara I in the Aryabhatiya-bhasya.
V. Quotations in the Aryabhativa-bhasya.

VI. Geographical references made by Bhaskara I and Some-
§vara.

VIL. Word-numerals used by Bhaskara J.

VU, Index-Glossary of technical terms used in the Aryabhatiya-
bhasya.

TX. Index of half-verses and key passages in the Aryabhatiya.

It is hoped that these Appendices would prove useful to the
treader.

10:3. Acknowledgements

The present publication is sponsored by the Indian National
Science Academy, New Delhi. 1 am greatly indebted to Prof. F.C.
Auluck, Vice-President, National Commission of History of Sciences in
India, and President, Organizing Committee for the 1500th Birth Anni-
versary of Aryabhata I, and to Dr. B.V. Subbarayappa, Executive
Secretary, Indian National Science Academy, New Delhi, and Secre-
fary, Organizing Committee for the 1500th Birth Anniversary of
Aryabhata I, who have taken keen interest in this work and have gladly
offered all possible help and advice from time to time. They have,
indeed, earned the gratitude of all scholars working in the field of
Indian mathematics and astronomy. My first and most cordial thanks
are offered to them.

I have great pleasure in expressing my thanks to the authorities
of the Kerala University Oriental Research Institute and Manuscripts
Library, Trivandrum, the India Office Library, London, the Bombay
University Library, Bombay, the Government Oriental Manuscripts
Library, Madras, the Adyar Library, Adyar, and the Lucknow
University Library, Lucknow, for our utilizing their manuscripts
in the present edition,

--- Page 121 ---
ACKNOWLECGEMENTS exvii

My sincere thanks are due to Shri K.V. Sarma, who got the
press copy prepared by me collated with the manuscripts in his
possession, supplied information on the Malayalam commentaries on
the Laghu-Bhaskariya, gave me valuable suggestions from time to time,
and got the book so neatly and correctly printed at the V.V.R.I.
Press at Hoshiarpur under his personal supervision.

Tam grateful to Dr Ram Ballabh, Professor and Head of the
the Department of Mathematics and Astronomy, Lucknow University,
Lucknow, for providing all facilities in my research. My sincere thanks
are due also to Prof. R.P. Agarwal, Hony. Librarian, Lucknow
University Library, Lucknow, for providing me with all facilities in
the library and for procuring the necessary manuscripts for my use
from other libraries.

My heartiest thanks are due to my colleague and friend
Pandit Markandeya Misra, Jyotishacharya, for his valuable help in the
present edition, and to my neighbour and friend Shri S.P. Bahuguna
for offering helpful suggestions.

I must also express my thanks to the workers of the V.V.R.I.

Press, Hoshiarpur, for the excellent composing, printing, and get-up
of the book.

K. S. SHUKLA

--- Page 122 ---
ByAeHAD
aaa

areat-farfaa-araag
arternrae:
[ ayaa |

aenTaaannat sad feaftoa
aarearaafanfea TATTT: |
qafgusaaal fafaatearcrat-
wea AN: SAAT ATA
waaay Baas qarelarafafrega-aaaifaar-

qaeqreqraarerad | aera aavfreaaHena adfaaqaaey
WTAT; BATT: ATAT AT TM TATET A LSTT ATA TAMA —

qiyvaanas % act taal Ww Fal
araazetitin Tafa Tied 3 areataat ‘mt, gl

exrem—Mss, used : A. 18063 of the Kerala Univ. Or. Res. Inst. and Mss.
Lib., Trivandrum. It begins with : eft: strrgaa aa: | aTarata aera
wt: 1 =B. T 368 of the Kerala Univ. Or. Res, Inst. and Mss.
Lib., Trivandrum. It begins with : waft: ui aardtfaatgaearearry
C. 6265 of the India Office Library, London. It begins with :
aft: ttrorva® aa: 1 afserneg 1 eftariuert ava: 1 D. C-1752 of
the Kerala Univ. Or. Res. Inst. and Mss. Lib., Trivandrum.
It begins with : gfe: sflaerqaad qa: 1 aralalduera amt E. 12806-B
of the Kerala Univ, Or. Res, Inst. and Mss. Lib., Trivandrum.
This ms. does not contain the Gitikipada but begins with
the Ganitapada.

1. B. om. arawe 2. 2B. itfarga

--- Page 123 ---
R aitfaarent [ aifreto

geat: TefaaTT:- aes, TH, AK, F, AAT, aqat,
aa, aaa: Afr, vals, whe, sre heat, TAT |

ga since eft “W-mee: sacar, Tao far yforger,
ge ears: | arsed Gaarafsanfeatad, zat FATT
agaa afer  earafaarsaead attra | 04H maria sirraaaae
wind, siataat, Tet a aaft | Tea, guzeiy eaqaferd,
fafaaTey | FATA, T THA gaay, Vawty eatery | FH zfs
qarqacreaaa |e after vaya fatacer |

ga gaat carat! wamaTaaas? aaa waa TTT: ?
carat: TeeIaesa: BTIARATTEATA” FT aewafa, Tas
fregat. BrssaTay: Torstar fet | waTeAI—aIT aT THAT:
ein [| fasafa |, wat vt aa HATCH IT-MST-TUAaNIS AT
Erpocast aarsaH: | Tamat afe ecarea fafaaret frteart TH Ta,
gat va [aa] aawsforerere sqafeqat fared [aat] wa: |
ale a—
um oa f% qaremt qa qa arate:
CRA AZaT AT AAA ATTTAT U
[ayataega fara, gato 92 |

afa | waat wat wa Vara, a: CATA HAT guarsaaaett atte |
aa: aati sifnaisgerfafa 1 waar aT ATA’ saratataaet: |
qeqraeg fagreqearg? Uoartncanafery FTIT aeaadicaa-
Walg: |

acai taavq | Ba UT FATT, ATA AaAT A | TT
aurea zara a fafrert | Fe aeat aa sfrqeq | at Haat

 

eqreai—1. A. B, D. cat for aT 2. B. frida for frat
3, B. Gaatarat 4. B. faze:
5, B.awen: ; C, arfacrrn:
6. B. aaa: 7. C, tararaeara
9. B. fafaarty; C. fafaatt ; D. fafaarfz
9, A. B.C. D, wTaat 10, C. faraeare

li. B.D. om. UF 12, B.C. om. #

--- Page 124 ---
yetre: q } Tora wearereg freer: 8

aera aaareaag a faefeat: | Sa a adieae—at ag oe
a at TA TT Fal 1 TN ata Gaeca-gae-acatfanay | caHa BTA
H:, AAT SFA, TL aT a BS, aeat taai, wt aa w sforses

aq ay masa, Gheay:, aareaar edifag:, warez
‘aqantag: ? afaeafagea aecafeitaa | aq aa aata
msqrafagafaaery ? Aare Ua gear arfascfa gr: 1 Tuafase-
fay: wectana areata | aat—“arenfaa avec, yar?
aramt, ararafargicear” afa [ seereardt Mo ¥, Tz: 9,
qayq 3, Titsaarerery , sracarfar: xqqu]

maat | Faigaaraay = osfera: sa," geezer:
TAIT | TAVTaAe Pert —sforceals | frareqrerataq”—
ge, Thaagey TraeataeTa , TMA adtsaq Fy ofa.
AAA 5 ae ET -aTAT ea -faere-eroT- fiver eT
aa UT frea-<arattatata-saasreafarseety aga feraear-
aay |e eft were wea | By CET sf | aa
saa FATT TATA: NG:, AAT TIT TaeTMT | Gar z-—
arrratea ava fe net are Georara va
aaemeafrareateniata araferat faraa: |
aa aiafcroacafarasiter famed ga-
faad aeqeataasiy fawa® egaa a aafaa uv

saTemI—1. B.C. add 4 2. B, D. om. @
3. Com. a 4, A. aq Fa Wt yaad ; D. war for Ta
5S. A. D. aat a ot wa
6. A.D. & for # 7. Daa
8. C. gap: ata [gap to 7] 7a, same line.
9. A.B. C.D. ofafe
10. A. B.C. D. fiat afeesfar
1. A. B.C. D. afraid seq
12, A.D, wa 13. A. B. eter
14. C. om. ar 15. B. feratsh fang

--- Page 125 ---
‘ eftfererret [ eifereto

oe wer OR mea: THATS | verse? eal TL TAT, Tea THT
afmarfafa: sreda, Here? Tea: | CAST eaAAITT: TATA:
Ha: | META HA-MM MSTA TTI ATA TEN | TAAT—

z were afarsd wezag IX a aT |
meaagitor rena: 9¢? werifirreRet 1
[aqatagafrag, vito os TATA, FM: &, Ho YX, Wito gy]
aft |

gaat, sfc se feomiq, varreered, aasrfirat
erat | aa fate: qeq, cea aea aaisfsargeaar! fet
we ua | aa aremarafessrgernfaashen frat Ter
waeq | aaat—adier areift, eat args, FAN: TH,
ST IaeTISSHTE:, TATeATSST:, sTMET® gfrat, vs THaAt Fatfrxar-
urafasstedt Saat: ; aratsfia:, oreifeer:, oraer faeo:, TAT
faa, sreqeg sarafe:, va wafexarfassreat Faq, AATATAK:,
qaeafaar, weqreea ex eft | eat Saary waa SeaTeT"
awa: TaTeAT: aTeMaaT «=o afrfesarerd® wa sarah: card
saat waeat cman: area aa saa AT Ta
catfrga fade: ga) a we aq acfaart Ta TATA TA!
wa? gered ofingen | male, warEais waOUA | AT RATT | eT
FHT BIA WAT UT | TTAT—
are as ae aiter att qaear qatsTat

eareatt—1,  C. rad 2, A. B.C, D, ater:
3. A. om. 4%; C. has 3 dots for 1%
4. A, D. fasarat daar
5. A.D. wm: aut; C. oF a Ua
6. C. arerea
7. A,B. D. saint Sad wtaa: 5 C. aeaateterct

B. ater afafesaead ; C. aremarar afasaa: ag ;
D. arengaar afassrre: ae

x

9. A.B. C.D, Teaat F-gap- 1 aa
10. B.C. waratoniy ll. B.D, aareearat

--- Page 126 ---
rite: 4] wegfriim x

gfe aeaae a aes att Afr wera) vanarla are, SF
aeat Fact a ot ga Aha

ariwe: aTaraer AAS: | athe vee aif aeqhr
Tada? | araad gat aaqa—‘artaetse otf ward fa, were
arary seafaaagarararate | oer afaq afacqeafa—cuarget
aa feamfate ore'—uagea usaf ud aaaet waft aa
amisaare faradrfa 1 aeartarartueedtfn wade, a°
qararaen aaafafs 1 wae 1 aaaraat aerpera: razz
qaq TeaTAI Haafa, agisse stfeer:—

gaugufaad araniqafafrary 1
alfecta ga sed fraea ceafaeaca
[werereayq, 9. 9.98]

afa* 1 wear getsedt gaa: arty fracerfaamtfaarreefeaarg-
wage TEM shaw sewraate—‘aaraerafedisiaftparga:
ancafarfcadial aman: were afe aeafasafe: sfaset
ferft 1 vararacaraat afraaafantearfaasratetarent
faerarrarre ‘oad wate wird arafeat der sega |

vir srafrat mary | afd, AAPA AH UT RST HTT
faery 1 are, osTofsarsyarsaattrararnaaaagneay |
aetfearare® frat arafeat | wea ga: faatseafafead *araaaar-
regia | asad fave:—aragvarat fear a arafeat 1 waaay
al cet—afaq art froveafafead aeaet, art feta are fs

 

eqTeqI—1. B.C. D. at

D, qareaT ; B, aa wate: ; C. aareara:
. B.C. D. atft-gap-fa

D, SI-gap ; C. om. az

.B.C. D. aafa a4

om. 2fa 7, B.C. om, areY

> Pp >

om. @ in stare

coe DA RY
FOO > &

B. C. D. %1a-gap-aregg

--- Page 127 ---
wate: 2 J aeenfarara afcerat 8

aanararardters: | ata aft aeasaoy faferdtert: 1 fateh
wena = safifaartasamraaardieart: 1 arafaafaf,
ara ATA aresaan, afer wee wa: arafaw:, Tata AT-
Trae: | cei sreateeraegitad azar aaah: |
grat ea wssafeegrarsaia are warded: | sft aqaqRTe-
airaearsarfrartarerea he ater ht sanfedagiaagaifa ara
qaniataaraatagario? | wateaeq geqaeropqeds aeafet geo
qam-rafafusaag st, a Raa qAla wage
TTT | TeasgeTEATAY: faeae afnay faa? sranenfate |
wat AATATAT SAeATAT Ue Ut

[ aearfazara afearst |

graineacerdad faraerart: [af] arararasara
ifastqaare—

arbre aisaitsarigetia arg Sat a: |
MATH ENT AT TISTT aa AA aT He UI

mee itfaqaes sarf—anteraiin, aa, wad, anteater,
Td, SA, a:, alata, Caer: 7a, wi, wa, qa, qeeqaw, ar

amie, antares serait warden 1 Fant:
TT Tafa [saaT, 9.9.90] | aabraearcorairoy at TEeIT-
Sfaetad ar ager aitqstate7a, ANAT | wat aTfarz-
veers: | at wt, at sft afmamed fronegracarssear, aera
framers anfarwazer wadtaa®) Yael, a ad: sai: TAEITT:,
chamateia area 1 aanterafe, ait Tareas sHreqy-

 

aTem—1. A.D. fafea: 2. A.D. faraifir
3. ALC. D. marqaarat 4. A. B.C. D. Heat
5. A. afoanfairea:
6. A.D, wastarabifarga ; C. arora
7 ALBC. D. sasq
8. A. Weq-gap-qaiq? ; D. same, with @ for 9: C. a@eqr.

gap-Talgaa
9. A.B. C.D. gap for

--- Page 128 ---
rite: 4] wegfriim x

gfe aeaae a aes att Afr wera) vanarla are, SF
aeat Fact a ot ga Aha

ariwe: aTaraer AAS: | athe vee aif aeqhr
Tada? | araad gat aaqa—‘artaetse otf ward fa, were
arary seafaaagarararate | oer afaq afacqeafa—cuarget
aa feamfate ore'—uagea usaf ud aaaet waft aa
amisaare faradrfa 1 aeartarartueedtfn wade, a°
qararaen aaafafs 1 wae 1 aaaraat aerpera: razz
qaq TeaTAI Haafa, agisse stfeer:—

gaugufaad araniqafafrary 1
alfecta ga sed fraea ceafaeaca
[werereayq, 9. 9.98]

afa* 1 wear getsedt gaa: arty fracerfaamtfaarreefeaarg-
wage TEM shaw sewraate—‘aaraerafedisiaftparga:
ancafarfcadial aman: were afe aeafasafe: sfaset
ferft 1 vararacaraat afraaafantearfaasratetarent
faerarrarre ‘oad wate wird arafeat der sega |

vir srafrat mary | afd, AAPA AH UT RST HTT
faery 1 are, osTofsarsyarsaattrararnaaaagneay |
aetfearare® frat arafeat | wea ga: faatseafafead *araaaar-
regia | asad fave:—aragvarat fear a arafeat 1 waaay
al cet—afaq art froveafafead aeaet, art feta are fs

 

eqTeqI—1. B.C. D. at

D, qareaT ; B, aa wate: ; C. aareara:
. B.C. D. atft-gap-fa

D, SI-gap ; C. om. az

.B.C. D. aafa a4

om. 2fa 7, B.C. om, areY

> Pp >

om. @ in stare

coe DA RY
FOO > &

B. C. D. %1a-gap-aregg

--- Page 129 ---
& rifererara [ mfamto

qarathr 1 ga waa? “afra FreTaTATAeT TAT aartta:”
[ meatearat, 3.9.98, TWAS STATOR | afr 1 aatererfor
PRT |

araat [| t | war gararraraaegad = aerate
afarnaata acre, canaria Haat sSTaTAaa FETT | TT
Faas MAT: AT ASAT AT garg «osrdlad 1 at
fanterert aseat | adegra sataarar waearrafe ser areata,
aar swegarat at Fat eqantercrorgatafa: at THAT Ta, Tea
areaiqranaread | ATATASSMTAT WHEAT STATTATTT waHTT
afer SI aeerrT: Tat FT frat sft antastat: caraay: tareag
waat, an zafent Tee AT feeararaafeet, Tea facarataias-
staat sareht eaTAaT: TATAT | ATAT aqifeaseatat WATT
wa ear’ | asaieaaTraTSeAAT SAATSIT: CATT |

gaat ‘say gaa WHIT aaeararat araaft—ar
‘amracantaragert ar at arsat a aft 1 aera aa sara
qa | anatlarcaeeal af aieatt ateat | aaa
SEAT THEATA HATASTAAT | TAGAT aafa—arta aaiererfin zara
at warca safe ofsatit waedtit 1 aaa fe “ea wT Wse-
earascetan” [srszreatat, 4.2.45] aft | qaeageafed TAT
wren afraaa care, aT aTfaTEVATAT: | AA TAA ‘era’ ate |

em, Sra ayy Sal | WAPHTAT saremara, aatfe[ aa |-
afida, At | sareraTealat AeeAT aT THA ATA AHUTASSAT
qafa | Sart Isa, Fare: TSafaeie:, ua weet una fad,
aa famereedt aart: | THratarranlerceard rasa Hye
gratis, aladararaeaeearar: | A VASAT THITALEAT | Ba: ?
afe Terdlaraft aarwaseda ed Ta sHtAT AAA TNT, A
TEA | Aas Tatas TATA! FAT [er | seernrraraatare

 

 

auret—1. A.B. D. wt; C. ga UF
2. A. D. va-gap-aifaret ; B.C. qaaara-gap-aitaaet
3, B. afaa-gap-aate 4. A. B.C. D. arearfa

5. A. alfed dertareaa ; B.D. om. ara ['** to aearat: |
aif; C. om. deqrat [aq eeaat:] atl
6. B. om. ay

--- Page 130 ---
wre: 2 ] dearfaanra ofcaret &

AAMT | TEATEA tardiat waTaseat 1 ar aie? Haag: THs
ASA CHIAAT AZSAT, garziare, wait wafama, ware atfas-
facarfe | wart ea: ? vafamarfeaserrar MTT THT
fagratd | aarteaa, a UF A AHIT: HHTCAZHETA Paar,
@arafafaaitand, aafeamarfafefa asear |

HH ME — VHA MATA Sa sera Bla, LHereartead,
aa TMT | TanatiereararareT we sATAT | TAT wT
gfe araniorfafeacata waraarafar aeear aaieraai sfa-
qaa, waraaiaermate a sft aateact aar eatdfcar aseat
glad waaa 1 wera ae eee Ha amtafear ase,
ag a vatafear ear 1 Acare—aeara arfatt [amterafer |
aeary Stata Tema aaa aeea, aft qTavaniererfor
arate caracraarht WaT eI aenreaitateda afaviafa, way
eqraea eTHTSSTIAITATA «| Ud ale aeTsET BieqH 1 a

aay say? afeaarisangisatrad | weata afe gaya,
fafafa at qa ? qaqa wa ‘SAL a! | Wala AHIR: HASH: SAT T:,
aqat wares va qaautfaraerra SA a1 waBT Warat
ae fafase: sfaamer? | gat “feta a” | asereareit, 4.9. 4]
gaa agtafafaset ware:, fata fafa fedita, vararit searar
famarasarenst: fast aeaa 1 wat arfeereqramd: fag:
qaRraaatesareracaemiaaeasT | afer tar Pafreararaor
‘sal a: efa wersaa: wa: | ea Tig amr: 2 aT a! ata Tae
faasen:, vateqraferacartara fameat ufasata | a, SRITAATE-
aseqraey’ Toate tai aalfwaarfeasenta watt gaat
eqraaaiea fag afe srareen Harararal aqadtgay— water
aiearait Fy Pals aT FseaT FqTGEITA, AaMlAwat | aq
TSeqT Ta ATT AAT AT 4 wae

earet——1. A,B. C.aataaem ; D. aarten
2 A.D. al; BW; C. We
3. A. B.C, sfaamen:
4. A. C.D. dearamegizag 1 B dente

Rio Hto 2

--- Page 131 ---
Jo sit feeerata [_ tifrato

maT TSTMAs— ateras aT AT Tsay
arf aeorft, art ferae afeaaa, afeaa aferas, aeer-
amg meager farag’ featag] 1 caer aa asa ay ayer?
aq eat | wee a emay at Thea, Ta Tag
aieqgy at ean | ® GAA aa eae: TET: | afe @eat
vq Fat ofereed war a Get 1 wa aat wa Haat
qforera aarfe act tater wala, AT aang = ayaf-
aad 1 a Beat Aiea aferaa aatfafesaed, aifase
greatfr 1 aris war dae’ [sffaato, qo] acre arareen feet
q sfaqrfaccae fadteateart aarcaseat caroarar vam
ay: Tag | AMAT A AATEC, TATRSATAT AHTT: | TA BET
ug sale: qa sft Ba Ale aod frat yeata’” [sfersTo, & |
saa aart TSaaaTi ey, T ISAM | Ta aaa erat AAHTE:
qtsaer, sem atfata fda) wal a Fad Beara Fae
Aat:, arte geadtat:, teat araarfsarerierad | wearafe
caer Wepsraeat, 7 Seas aaa Haar: CAT: TSA, TEATT
afadiaen? 1 aferrt ca Fae eat f mre— afore
qa VaR ET RATA TM eA AT CAT: | Fa
gaat aaierts sare:, feta sare:, TAA sate, gearfe | Ta FATT
afaay aieartg saaasert | AaTATAEeAT 4 equrataa-
aeqaae AATEATT |

gyal aisat srt ater, at wat a, aTeaTA Aas
eq 4 a Wa aT FAM | ASAT WATT TAA TACIT
qanracrateata a dale anteredige wart: TaRATTATy TAT
searfag, Fa Tar AMATATMeTAL THT TATE a ATT TTT
aque sarfag | vafrarufecate cay atiatearlg atsay | eT
ficanrafey st Bia ? TeaII— aay FT AH AHTUTAA:
aU HOATAMTNAT:, aM Hara aartafereaer: swyperd, Ta
narfr 1 aa ‘frat qeara’ geatiag rare: TTA Ta THETA | WAT
aaearay aria ateararis sarieararia a Ag aatereraTier TTT
fretrat |

wret—1. A.D. aaqeatrafarag 2. C.D. add waiteara

3. B.C. om, this sentence.

--- Page 132 ---
eee: 2] watfeenreasngata: 44

mar qauscremeniafeaay eqrag aseqr aeafafgaferar
wafa car ad autafaft ? aeg—aareant at. aararaea:
Aq: | AAT MT AACA | aATRUaTaT aateae avaTecoaT: |
afeaq aarecuat ar err safe, fanferar equ wafer)
fanerea sfenfaq aaqqaerd ? gar ‘qasdefeneq aa
saa, Vara Fafeeratty fanferat aarerat zak
aes caer wafer | afe sak aera gare: gel faaferr: a
ma aeMTereTare = ema aeaTA |oagearafear — faenecaa,
vafrarad: caeMEtearae ema ateaa, gaia y qraediee
waft aradaragaraa cru faaca aseqiaeezear | wazafz.
wrasse = peearfaaernraqeersiafeeey | | eared.
AAT TATA EMA HATA

aaroraaniacaa [ar] aqeeat ar awerafufza'-
carerafear aexarnifa ftfrargacsererin agi adterta sreathr
Teafice sasha, tarardater aresereriy ast agent a wafedd-
Te awe | aart—‘grefaaro. egy’ [atfaato, 3] sara
eee -Msaey TSeAT Ses FT BTefsaesaey | af ofadat areas
Tal SPT-MeeT Fey aseay va aarefawrosacarhy refs | a
afe sfatetsaed aeeq: | at aaa: | af aera
Margaritas aeeqr ene tar aed q sarang TAIT |

[ sAfaamessngala eqearmnrcaay |

wa marearihean egevereaaiat srguia: 2 warm:
sare | warqaat—atarara aefgeadfasansscafirg: |
WaISeT TTA eGeaeTeaatat srgata sf | aE a

wetfzaratanteadiia: attamreerrersage®: |

asmS HAT ATqET UNV TRA AHTT

st | mam: ae? wa ead, araefe: | aa: aaa
frerat argaia: 1 adista aterquert egewencrdaraar ae

 

fareat—1. A. B. C.D. aetarfafze
2. B.C.om. aar 3. D.a fora
4, A. B.C. D. ararai

--- Page 133 ---
az ettfererreara [ sftete

Margarit vfs Permiartarsanratenass fafiaay |
Themen seaaisat:, Tear adds faear:, Aet weteatsanhrhehs
WAST, TAT ATH TMT Feahgqepeaaar sy Freq
factarra grt qexarseaeamraeaf | ep a qaeT ATT Sa
faaofertentaraed wari a wadtearatarate TAN SATT ZIT
TTaTTaacaaraaaaa 1 sarah wee agree
TAI; Aa — ear y Sra araraqaaseTaay sees
aaa” [ qgareeaaafaeg , vv. ¥] eft) varrarreat gar:
THATS TT: |

WATT weet — solrrerR Sa eTTTTA BTAT TTT T-
wrateat thfeae eaetfacPre fat 1 casa a) sateify ferfaaa
facar qieat fesqamaris aiorsaemeaudter qeeqi fefir firf
aa feede sfamedt aeaed | varagaareaaarat = farqeqy-
werraaTe satfeat afamaoreteaet sarge, wassqarae
aaa “waTaar area sat after arta Grady fe
airray a peazy TATRA ThraATy
ert grarafearag , gaarnafesrare genfrafeararara: |
qararsarearat aft: semi Serarareat ascaa seadt afraat
waaa, wateaears reTdtarereermrarara + sere offer,
a4 afz aMargrrameganertaanraentan: seat faaey ?

was —Tarais smdife fafaad farda qaeat freq
Tat sroreatweanatey fisted facdared wegedt sea |
wifarraer saariqr satresayfaraar: Wt: HTSTAI? eaTAT
Bras Tea silferameaser  feratarcaeat aqened,
gaaawesHeaT | generar saferanh:, sear venta:
Tey) Re? aeare veiserrat acct weg fay qyeeqy
mrenahaay aaraqqaqead wah, a treated TeeTUTEAAT |
TEATSOATferes ea garea fineTa gaa EAM ALA RAL ATA ATT ELA

sareat—1, ALB. C.D. ayar

 

2. ALD. MITTIN; OB, aeTTaTTag aT ;
C, aeararaaratagnerarsaaryaty

2. C. STE | D, mrEHA:

--- Page 134 ---
were: 2] wah faerereanraeat 43

ATEATSAHTTAT TAIT: WaraTararanrfares sft | TATA aaa +
frerarqrara aerarnt favaararg gameaqurafiaaed a agit
aearfn iq eer qrerqa qaaaaercara fanaa HATTIE
afermacnenaeaacarfecar «= waedafeneaa aera afacaante-
areanaaaaanarrare genfrafaed, afr tee afat-
Hag | ACATAANITAT Far: TaTarararami fares sta? i

masa— tara gsenfaafery ) Tea — asl
aTAaaaTaaeT Get wresedt agreateafaat Uenfasarat
4; at gawd feaaea afe: forar arft:, aferrat faerrar
afeteaaes arfafefa | qaranacrertaracania safer aug, raha
aad, wafaeta | aeaTET Be TePeadlarat cea, afenreareaea4se-
anfeqar vdtarer’ feared sasha, Gears aay PTIET BeTAAT
ven waar | aeaTgerneareanrftaaaaanrraarietatataat
veniadarraiafarseaittayacaataAa FT WaT HSTTTTT
Tinea | ata aeaed sarah sree
sframfat | ava aafeat safe a asad staf aearfa aa
TTAHAMTAT A ATITAAaAT TTA ah: BIAMAAGTTAa FATT
meqaaaesT | TEATAAATTAT Fal: sarareraranifana xf 1
qeafa a—

AAATMARAAA APTAA FPN: NAIA |
asatancea aa faard canfaarar
[ wtaraTz:, ~e |
af |
[ aarge sailfagaeasarag |

aq Sat sarfaoraaArTa, Fars Al CAeATy grays
face SRT aarseda:” [TaSHaneaeay , ceqaifaag |
WFI yar sofas | Halsea sareTy ?  TeNTeTaTa-

emeat—1.  C. addn.: afat [afamartattaaraad ginger qoteqaifz
SRUEUCT ATSTAT] TeeT
2. B.haplh addn: fa [agea aaarnsa Frerararareaersiai
faraaeaig aeTTAAaaaass Tarrearaafana fa] weaey
3. C. afeat for Ft 4. A.B C, D. wétear
5. B. stfar; CA srea

--- Page 135 ---
qv eftfererrerat [ sifirete

Fravanshe spectre Farndaa, a a set gulls wate |
arafirmasatbroreaar ASI AeA AAT | eT FaeraT antat
correcta fret —

weet caratia aniarge: wos: farteeat

fagrad a waa aifsatest @ arg a

[arfirtrafirart, sito 93 |

searfe 1 aay seardaron: e4: ea: eqraHeNsget: TTMTIT TT
sreareasaraha, aaa: 1 “mpelaesrdar: BVeat:, RETA
qian apefrasttrar SSAA HISHeATaATeaT feta eT
aq qed, ATT TSAATT |e CF ATPAEATEAATTPTU TAT
qeATagt CATAHCTAACAT: TAMTAT CA fasreaeaT TATTHTT-
gaedt fredas | aarartdaerrarco aft are qaradtad |
a a ani ged wate) a aradasatirarmaar aeieaty Aa
aaa Tae | sara Faget Sarat tart feat zertfa SATA
qiisagee tare fasarqaan a fad wa Sarat mecurfarcate-
areargarel Frag:, alga WeaTaT ArIFHA STIS Ala | UIST FI
facar Far: | Ay wseerferratant | [eat fafa: |, qeeta*fafacara
gern) aT a: WeeT Fey TaAt TA aearsfasaermeanis ta
aan apa serarpfadtarmraifaarerfafa: | a at saifrara-
qacaft | 3% al aaaat Feed ad cr salfraraay
afnaaeataar Ta |

aasa—qergrafaeararen:” aft afe ag yse Tard
faetakt aa afe fafa satawra | aa RAY:
areat adore sfavarfaaatiaeraearearfiar 1 aa aratfafaa-
stagsarcat fer ca gal frag: | a a Soria preareqat
frag: faa a aieqarfasaaat erg cara frarttaer Tee
any | ud a aeq*a yat YAM, q Shara seat at Safa
aratfa feora eft 1 a aa adterat aaarararfata er: aT

 

aqreat—i.  C. tat 2, B.C, D. wae
3. A.C. wa 8sty 5 B.D. setat-gap-ssrg

A.B. C.D. ateam | eaaa: TH-gap-faery 1 A

A. B.C. D. oat for Tat

D. serasqararayarfaa fart 7. D, om, StH
A.C. D. faardtfa ; B, Fravdtia

eR YF

--- Page 136 ---
geite: 2 | sett ferererrestsrrer tetra 4%

a dares’ deartg arafagenr: saifasraaarearareaead 1 aaa
aay —
va aeeq ferd erat wat Ae a asta |
ger sat qeerat fagte gaargara u
[ arracaaeaqta:, ararereata:, FaTENHLTT , 9eTo co |

aft 1 aa warmth: sfaqfaeaet eeiea geageaat at
aadasafearaazar saa? Carafe ae a ata fae VTTTTT
wrer gen yaaa fe [WEMTATTY, tro 9, sfosar 43,
qo 4]. aa gerey sfaofassat arardtasafasrmaar aay 1 aa
4 qaai—aas: Tar aaan waar [sta] aaeeqarea fas
[weEqagay, 9. 9v.3)1 aa eatin gaaggqerecacarit-
aa: 1 Uae fagaaaqeeetiass sfaohaesar araia-
SHAT AAAT STAT |
WyTy—
ana waeat aqarerat aiser Brag
geasefs ygc ar aed at gota

[ WaeAla:, 2.30]
eft) wa qoaearel, Aaaer qoraser, agder at ofaafassats
aT ATA TT ATAT ATT |

aeaed— sara AITTATTT Qoare FATA: PHT STAT”,

“fag fagaefan”, “carat quires Sfgeat 4” [ THVT ETAT,
qv.we | eae serra aera Tea RATT
a sfaataegel’ aracrasatfacraar aaa’, waarfe ofaare
AHI «=| TAT aga STAT sartamaarg fraieatseea
RaraTeaTea:, T Tere arrararfaesarsrsameqear: | seedy
satiTaTaaTT |

sareat—|. B.C. E. at-gap-aifeg ; D. ararafeg

2, D.om. 4; B.C. 34 for =
D. hapl. om. sat. [ar araa] aan a qaad
A.C, aagentdfa ; B. eyafa ; D. earedfe
A. C.D. sfaqeget; B.om. it. 6. A. B.C. D. afaqeaa)
A.D. arafer 8. B.C. om. age

a HN B® W
> - : .

--- Page 137 ---
ak sivfereteata [ wifaste

geasa—aree | TTT cgaraiseaTartaad ot ATT
fat wreata wat AATAT duiqreat same TSaaT Zea
ay” [QTeeRTTATAR 8-99-9-R | sexe sarasota aero TT,
sqranred TSaut Zeaa gaat aTaeHasar fear aay aTaT | We
[area scat | “Tae Uferat HeaATAT ASTHTATA EMA ALT
[ TERT AGTH, %- V2: q | gaaes | Wy AMATATAT “aisat FaT-
“geararareat aearatadita aT Tie aaa” [ATTAtaMAqay
%. 3. xo; Alavameateat | KAT qa VevaT SMISACATATATEATAT:
qf CATAR AEAATAR AAA TA RATT A ALT saaes satfasraa-
args, afeaea CaraTeaeaA, A TSIM area faseyerera-
qeeafeeaead walicaraay | dat A ce faa ea TATA
[| afatiaarany , 9.9.2.9 | waarle qeTaTTTATATaATIA “afeasat
qacax [dacaz |, safe srafagadiat [arearaaratagay, Ty:
ato, 9-2| ef mafaqaa? — sfaafasaet afeararata-
safasraarat [a] sad) araea— cagrqyrarareat ae’ | aa
TIM, 44.2. 4%. 90 | saqarfe dearest [atta learay a
wig “HITT are Hala TT agatg’ [aenereqarfctirse-
aTtareay, aTsTay q|

afa as! @ Be ware A cera atari |
aaa gaged avigy a Watg 4 vw
[aqeafa:, 3. 28%]

afa |

fe agar, sacnrafararnt fatateralaeraret aunt facarat
erEeqat 4 a satfasaaarigat AATRts:, seaeaa salfagaaara |

[ Aereagie salfaaarentaaaar |
dimes’ fafrasaggdfraamt [areata] Tyg mT
saan’) aaa gerpanin: at ca target Teal —"FaT

We

earent—i. A. D. aisemrateqtat-gap-wq ; B. same as A. with STAT
for 4; C. same as A. with safe for 44
2, A.B, C.D. & for = 3. A.B. C.D. sfaveat
4. A.D. a for 7 5, B.C. aay
6 A. B.C, aera 7, A. water

--- Page 138 ---
sire: 2 J sotfarared ata qe

fa ufacafe ? warnsd gearfendin saad ? ware gavhaiofass 7
parsaneara 1TH ? Bay Ua arf’ ? garara qa A ufacafe
migieaaararanaer ? FT HAT yauea H Het afore ?’
RATT SATIAATATT: Ta UT YAY? HAT TAI | ayy fe— Har
qrant fared saa? war afeot faarera sfass ? Har aaa
eum [frat] ? war at art ar aaafa ?’ vasa sameaneag
aa: sade | tersgraaisht a aHahfaerraaes HAT Tae |
ay 4 aq fafeasgu vata a aaifa ‘qaasaggasagaital’, ata
at ake’ cafad wate a aaifa—an aeratier ada, araper
vat’ eft) aat a efeafmerfae: caorearnfafaaasaa ofc
aratfaghtanty Tada

qafeaggy faerat & geq -zal® wat

aq ay ahsaraed a ofasiates |
aaa gfeaat sig canta strata: |
eeageafanal fe afeaai’ set ataa a

zearfe | aar a snafmerary—
afaait taal gel gadedea areata 1
atari aaaatfon cart arengeaat:
gfe) gat a fara —
afantg fama sag aeitg a)
aa ax aueiat agaeta staan

 

eqreI—1. A. B.C. D. saearfa for genta
2. B. a-gap-ey Jag ; D. ws for wz
3. A. Waa 4. B. a feisaq
5, B. fafa for fafa
6. The reading faqq may be suggested in place of -tat
7, A.B. C.D, afead 8. C. aed for 4 wea
9. B. fayaee for fasaea ; C. aan ar favart

No Wo 3

--- Page 139 ---
4c mifaarata [ stfrate

aifagrasaredists a at qafafalaaaygatger ees TAT |
aa qaafearecercarea frat qfecha | grarsoarzaant fer
qararaamargcart theecter | faaRaeaTsnaetaat | FAX |a-
[a lagactedigigeanfaasiaafirreatea 1 seeay satfearaaa
aaraaera | safes Tat afaatqay uz Ul

[ agian gaan: |
FETT BraTOT Tea ATA TATE —
gaa: =yZ Ti
qanegaa = fefrgrag are |
af gira ge fe
ayy EH AAA TTI: U3 Ml

gear, garfa—gaciaarr:, aay faust frem:, afar
afrafan va, wafifreqed afsafer:, 3 afeatnr wa,
fefrguasg’ afaaton:, sR, ah, gfeaea, 9s, ferqy, Fo,
afeaeqg, vate waratt 4 qaifa afaafenfafasetae |
ataafeafiae wemarht ses ARI RAT, ‘ad fase catiey’
at ayaa: |

[anefarmo:] 1 git cfaaros qaefaare:, Zeer AT
cfraror: gach: | at erafaars wert | Aaa arefrasr:
seared wala ?— ae a feats grea, qt yt
fauna: egy aft 1 cada aia aralree aAg arafaaree Tae’,
ada a amet sata | aay, feeg auifae a frat aaa aaa
qedama ar fant aufae fasy afe feawaset aiaeey
ar gi sarfafaser aeMT TT AHA TAT gfenfeafat faart aft
AcRIAMSAA AEATTTAAT « AVTT | TSAR TET faqa-

 

euyeat—1. A. om. fafa; B, a faquaaa; C. a fofaguaet
2. C, eévarfgettar ; D. ealarfgedtd

A. aaa-gap-aea ; B.C. D. Fai-gap-4ged
B. om. ¥ 5. D. om, 4
D, & for 5 7. ALD. om. §

A.D. om. ait tfa aro:
A.D, we aa aga; C. 1% ai aeaft 10. B. om. 4

PP ary

--- Page 140 ---
vite: 8 ] Tatert gee: a8

aseaea avaseaen aren aaifafacer weno wea, TeAeTT
feara efa wexaaenrifefafa:) gee gaat feaafa weit
aa wages: aaa afsarae sasat | wfsart a azar arza-
aT va gt ofa sare | wear Blea Hit TET aT TiATeT
ud aearoT aaoet fafese® wafe | aearq osdlecadiaarar-
FATAFATT eaTeAIA, HOT TET gras: | Jat A—

fafrccersrareenfaraiaatra: |
RIT IBIea TaTTaT: eae sMagifeHy 1!

eft 1 sacarafrerad zfaquernmes: araeadta:, vfaryit
afar: agrees at eft wafaaq ? [xfaeqaeror eft]
mranatsh geefreara watecaaat gst wtefrarwes | ud afe
waaeidasa farce, cfagrarnes vagaries wfaga-
war sft uta Uagrrrrersea cages eagraTersaey
aafefediaa wdtacteanrarat dufsatafetea | ada gaia.
arog: AIT ad, T fafSaq Haraz galsaATT

grits: fara: ? sea way saTTaieaa aa
GAT: AHUT, TT THITATCATA STAM | T MHTLATITA TAIT,
at afeay cart aeait | watea fracarfzecaear farfagartr |
ASUT ¥zQo000 |

. afa owafteqes 1 sparfirarranragatre = afrgqeat
cmreay arr: | mathe aaa aarat 1 garerferaeorn:
wafthegar | qaats aniaieartg qeear earaalar tanita
wunaeteaizstar free. | rgxht yoo sssg |

Sfetagged’ | ats area: ada cqearasie’ fafa-
afrat:, areates fa erarfeaaATseraam®, qYRRVRGYoo |

 

zaTeaT——1. A. B.C. D. meq 2. A.B.C.D. arent:
3. A, D. seaafafece

4. A.D. om. one tagrannresy

5. C. om, amt 6. D. &

7. C. TOT for ATT 8 A.C. om. sfa
9.

C. adds *ATa

--- Page 141 ---
Xe eirferenre’t [_ sitfersto

waasfasiit aeerin eer waar TaeATaTMTTTT
feraraaafa 1 avaarfr [wat] wear carat sega wart
faa qoaediearaar gaear sat warrfaaeT: |

sre) a Ut maT: faqeTara: STEGST gafia 1 wate
asaeragaceriatet — feet, aqaraay eaNaAT WWSeTaAs
qeafa 1) meres wa: aTanatT TT fesrararcaeat AeA,
FaraaeaaeaT 1 way oTaaT a ey, TT afeaeat geet
[oa] azat atoaeda 1 vat arerfngan: ey, car afeaeat geet
VATATASATy | TETAS HTETST TF seaere: ‘aTAT ft |

far gesferonyTeat saarafreare—‘efagara: § [aferar: ]’,
[atafeato, ¥| efa qfererraay | Aaafea, cHrtracPeTearcaTy
gferarara | sequin pfearesfardera: BATT TAT YTS TAT
ay yas | HT sWayRaT? seat fefrquasg” =f
guriaea:, ‘cfayaier yferar’ efa afeaatrem: | By Teta
aay? geqa—ufeqasarrfter: 1 wa TAATTATT: | AAT HAH
gata sateedaraa are afaqnett | aerate cataract
ee | aear—afaaraqaret ad wa ger: aA ye THT ATT:
afin 1 afalara|eferseratraara [oT] EPAATTTATAT:” |
acdcrineg—afe qaafraqarh: gsewert: Hao fase:
grea, car afrarrqerat: Pear ef” eeeaeATTea: | AAT
atiararraata wat arta | wy? cfaarert areata ferccat
aferagarsaraivara faraea SVSTSATT: BAT AYA case:
warfetadaar saisatie ata aarifsaad, aeafaserg-
rocarft ae sramrfayfind sear aaatercesy [wettse: | afer aaa
aig cearaa: | waar, <farseretray arent: ayy
cfaaracraa: wfarerse, famrar arerrfrearfa® [sata faerat ayes
ePraraarara afertq scarf] eet BAT gayserzgeute frat
aufa—ate grease, releereMTa AAT, TAT SAISATATT-

eureat—1,  C. 7a-gap-sTTaatrr 2 D. &

3. A. B. D. faaat 4, A.B. C. aaat
5. C. Tat: 6. C. 3am:

7. B. om, fraca fa; D. fafafa

8. C. faerarta 9, B.C. om. ¥

 

--- Page 142 ---
were: ¥ ] - Sgheergerenrern: R4

arequanmt: fara: ? at! Gagserayfinagayqantai gy aarotfe-
afer: 1 maar, csatfaqorareday] 92 x 30 x go |-qauEaa-
[2qgoo jattrareamarargencaa == -asemradfteerenrogtra-
qarnfecara? grey we aTTEe:, Heraasewefercar:* |

af gfera| qdazafigrarat tfeara, sata RATT,
WSU qveuew | ge faega, qdaea, sxarfeqaarfercaraa:,
WSEUT evarv lade gw afeerqe, Farfragrawesaarfeae:,
AST 22AEoRy¥ |

qyauat: | wyeT gary aye, aah: ate: | qaer =F
ST | HP TTT | TTA: ST, TTA AT: | BET aT:
aq wa qeguae eqeaser sft 1 wast pranoranqeafa-
seareara ‘ferfaeataferae [aerare:, xo] seaeat atfearai
saregreara: | wa fecttar afar: 11 3

[ adeaganat: |
TET ATT TIT TAT ATE
qr Sher 7
aufgaa ag saftas Aaah |

wares, sfear, au, qfret, aT, wefaaqe. vagy’
ufaafemat fram: varat: |

VaTaaPATTATTAT TAT STATA | wee TT ATT,
VAIIATTITTT:, Wear Aegqaseqeqery:, TET woaRqe 1
qua qaqa: gyfat areearataiataeeigata:,
WHET qoszeore | AW Taga ATSAATATM: wafaga sear fia-
TATAYAT:, TEUT Go2V@zGs |

 

yal Cw,
eateat-—-1. In place of dat to a4, D. reads : aar aaysaTgyectse-
graraprrg: fart ef ‘Bar weg wafer gorprcar-
arama’ ef arart[ca Bans] saeTge, yaTftga:, Ft
2. A.B. yfacartat 3, A.C. D. om. a
4. A.B. C.D. fa-gap-eafa 5. A.B. aaua; C. ata
6 A.B.C.D. ga for gaat 7 B.C. om, am

--- Page 143 ---
RR aitfererata [ wtfaate

mare wwea:, aretfeaq yas Mes: 7 yAalA Way
vafsecen ga: raeTeT A at fafewaes; GT ATT Eft, AAT
atia eft fader, | gad wate, cer ‘ofrey Faq
amor, weqaha, wefrge eae wert FA twa ATS CT
faaa:, Tet TINT: 2? yer car faa Ra: ? waa TTT
MSTEATATAMT | EA MTR TIME AF FAAS grata fafase: |
aa ate wamete atgegeafa seaTie Tega, amamea Fras:
maemt, a aimed, wae arta afer | aT AT; WANT FT
feat wate, mat ae:, Hus, eA: [ aTeTTEATA, 3. 7.2. TTS AT
area | eft 1 asitered aren gerfe arhed anfegena, va
avsedt AVS: | TIT ATTA AT |

warts 1 fates ase a Tor, Fa ahyedta | Tat
MITA | HET SA THT: | BP TTT: | Harrratat:, saat: |
‘eqy gra vareaaTar: ahryeMATATA | AT: quaint faug’are:
afesmedt afrg srreaed, oA? TTT ATT: area | Ua oA:
‘gegearaat aq send; At eet aro wafea, gaeaarorartata ?
wdeat— aa aeerdiare [edteafeaatary aro: | | Aaa
eHReuenfara aera | Tear: arrdraar: Heam:, oaret, ARs,
afeaat, sar gcaraa: | aT a eger wenfatd: sora: arated WaT,
aTerat | gar wafaseaadtarrnactfenrerfafa: sora: ATES:
area, waarfs | aeaTgaray SaaavereT: LATTA PTA: | SSA

suatasft [2 Raveatg’oraTa Tae |
goat a fant araranafassd

[araaralay , X35 |
gfa | qeaTqaTTATacaea S17: |

sareat— 1. B.C. D. om. F

2. Com. a 3. A. B.C. D. aafaaqy

4. A.D. & for % 5. B.C. D. aat for aa:

6. asfrag; C. aa 7. C. oma

8. C. ay

9, A. sata fadar aearg ; B. Snead Pagar Feary | C. sed

fagar 4 arg

--- Page 144 ---
gee: ¥ j raga: 3

[ vagrant: |
AT MAMTA AAA AAS —
gaa = wafaear

arRaTTTaaaTaTa ATTA: | Bars TATRA
earfiaaAr:, ASAT VIVRE; TS ATT: | WATT fasta fartrantia:
sfrat, jaratraaarfafaargtavsarismterd, Tea TaTATTATA-
nfadafa 1 at aearfgsttesa | acura clafaqasereaane: a7:
arena | aaaraar TaIAAT TWAT AVeaTSlearaatH: Feat wa, ate
waar: oat AsaeeT:, a aatfats 1 ea ate ? a ua
eumataraante fred, fartrrcararar: at git) aeaTgaT
aferot ar faeta: aera | feat aeRae: Td Sead, AT a aa gTAATA-
fafa? ale, ciftareareaeaeaara oa: WEITT Tal aeara AAT
[ftfaato, 5] sfai aeareaftfnseracedaray | ag qafsereat-
sfeat ?  aem fretaTararey TTaTHTa: |

[ wronzeantatfafaga: |

wa adreaqraaron, afery are, wfera 2H, wearssatfaras-
TAM TACT RATE TAT | AAET ETAT ATT —

qaeasaigaey aR We Ul
qaife, warateare, 4, TATATA |

qurare: gate:, aferq gag) Aga “torgcafaeases’
[aszreatat, xy. ¥. 9q | afa antated aa gare ata afater aT
aig: earareaiaachreacate | after: aarareaiahe:, afenferg vale
afeqfeaeq vada ca getaleate wate) gafeaa gqerfearct-
HAIGAGITA TT | TT Tafa SAQITTASTAT TAT | aevwtaay
Wal Ay: | we Tea: wae aIeT Talears Dales: | Tai
grat faarqrary’ wnag wate’ | weeteaTal 2.2.28, TATA |
RH TqUTa: | TEATATT BAA, AMATHlagieal AIMS: BTA
qaieass THAT Bel: FAT CAT MT AAGHTCSaT: |
AMSAT TTARITATS Way A AT ATTA | ARATE

sqieaqr—1. A.D. om. we 2. 3B. OT:
3, ABC, faatar 4. A. B.C, D. aaaraateaied

--- Page 145 ---
ay tifaarn [ atftato

qafaard aearaueatiay arafasrty qaet eqHt: TSaTATA, Ta
aga aaseatg Bq sqreaetera:? gaaisiat eaafeaag’
AMFTTHATTT: ATT | wae varrarata aafafa 1 gate
gata weratfatea i ca qatar alfa: ue i

[ Bean aqnasamy a |
RIGTA ATI Tarracag ets —

all waa S AgaT-

TT TA TAA TAZA: Tat F |
REMTATTCT

7 aT gekerara aaa” ly ll

ale, Waa:, & acafaaknat free, agg, ya wa-
aafaatee va, vat, a, a awfaafean, ayqrt:, DAT
[afaufaaa: |, a, weqTe:, aroTar:, T afaains va, a, TefeTATE,
a, HRA, Tay |

& ofa saradreqay | HEA HE: mE, Tafere cers. | Tea
areca ead sarfata are— saat ea AGea HAT: FTA TATA
TAIT feaae aan ara: ofadea 1 wsHeT RAT: fad firraraz.
fate are— Rage: vet gracafagarft wat: mateo | Wa
waqead Tagrecaagariy’ aaeaehate | wet GaVAT HEAT

aanaciaga  weaacfagieaa 1

gia unaafaagania wareawy | wa TAN? yada
meat ast gaiteaTrs: | raacaferagenttat maTVeaT ACTA
wa gatas —

agagrraiaagag wert fag: 1

wia anagearat asgrrafedt wat:
[atrgaagtiar, « 5 48 | ayeata:, a 93 |

eareaI—1. A.B. C.D. a=ai-gap-ai 2. A. B.C. at

3. B.C. D. aaafeqaeq 4. A.B. C, we
5. A. D, feaa:; B, farat 6. A.C. aaqqT

7. B. hapl. om, : WaTeaRty[ay to TaaTacataamifa Jrareaeiafis

--- Page 146 ---
aire: | wea RXR

aft) aa caacataraganfinttirartt aia graze wate aenesaa
qarefatia: | aanercaaitivat, sat sadanaractr gree
waft? genre g grecofssagia aateacy | meetat ase
aan feaa eft wagrTay

ag aay aaarg fearat waa cufaareat seare— mara a
Tar TaeeID Thseqa: | aeaaey AAT: Prater qareaTe— aagar:
BAU wa: aeamea eaters acafaafeeerfa | qezriazerfreaes
ay War eaitat a faqsear: eaaarerceafsar 1 a TAIL
qicaarea areang gay Tiere: qefeae:, gene gefsaara,
arearet T4T | Tefeataivafaaia ara wafate araredarfa-
faacarea aferrare: qdfafs eqretay 1 geqar qamearafafeead |
wa aaa, watht a ami, wa a grater: cafe: | waTe
vataaraia agate |

waa meaq— fatate ami gues serum
ateteatgersara afa ? Sfearg? fara eff 1 aaa
aaraig: again [aatni aaa gr] |
ay Taya Tear areaigza ayaa: 1
Zatg aay caverta = fay
cRINaT ada agen ga au
[Fafa 9. €e-vo]
we TI Aa AnTeeTs wa gegen: 1 aera
anaamarentateaaas + Feat | we Tafa eat wen fa
Tiara | tarea—quraat eafrarat eft 1 gmt as waat
arta grrfs sseqsry:, vee i ware a acqneq qat: qa-
fanfagaft, acafgarft qaeqeera:, CXS 1 Rath exdtagartt
acter fare 1 sag? eqq-qeearfit anit TTTAITA 1 aT
Ser yis qaifir, aeqcarheaageesreqoagayoft, 4e¢c2ac0000 |
watt a ascifaafarrgres qaaqey suitor PUVA ANS TATA:
RY¥oooe, Ua: Alea andaqwaerIaqTATMT 46564200008

cureat—1, A.C. Sfaaraarg: 2. C. arta
3. A. B.C, om. this sentence.
HT. wo ¥

--- Page 147 ---
Re wifeara® [ stfarate

carry are: afrqarel’ aaleaaeaniia: | oraa agivedtart
afaqreg ararcaa sfarcarain: fae 1 afeaersdot gw: safe
Raat, erat gare, afar’: MATT | ‘qaraqaaral-
ara Tera saya qaarareeeaaq weqTadaceyiga:,
afaqgaary Ay: 1 mt seq, gages ar Pert a
weafaq aq:

Tal ga: aterureatarearetto: fae, gat meqeaey ula
an, Weer TsrTT wa? [air |eearestot grasa: UMS]
anes 9% gTH ayy aleadalraea ha aosariq, 8S steq-
qfar glerderadt wgraa: qaer, maqeaer = aut teat oes |
waa sale. DITe: TTT: METS Tey,
aaderateafa: gra: fear ef waar avaey | ae ate
[agfasat wat] eft vafae age TAP TAT 1 x 1)

[ wart seaisninfa |
wi wel sara, fer gery gHAaaT aaa,
TSATATARIS —
MMATIWS BH,
ASTRA FT-FTA |
Ta Gai a,
GEN Tes, wale: Wg

[afaur:, 3 after, aa, 3, arrears, T-a-A-
OT, HHT, Ct, Hai, t, @ATN, aeaa:, wai, we: 1]

virentafatear: afro: oferere 1 a afar cma:
pea pahreag—s we, gremTMasaTs wales eta 1 efron: aa
afman’ aranfaaoaea, cack creat wafer 1 & umaismardtrarhr
Hae: | RAfAcaTS— asaeenataas waa-yo | a TTT: UTATSMT:,
‘Ty: Far, Ry: ara | wafeaeareteariteants
water emAPa Ca Carat gaa ar igar a eaaTaT:, Rey
(REOCOYoRGRooo, WAMFAT | AraraNTHT sy WAATET;

saremt—]. A. B.C. D, afaaaigiait 2, C. om. aT
3. ALC. asarqaidag 4. C, qaafeqan

--- Page 148 ---
gee: & J aerort ereeresrerrerritt rw

amare saat arart sea: aateer ofefir, emer | ATaT
aafefracara arataea Tiaras aeTaTe |

anal facat caaitmaritea: apearaerartcariacer
MENT | MATT HATTA HITT VA | AT ATAT— TAGTATAT fardi-
HAT FAHACAATHT TTAATHATAT:, TF ATSCT F3RqRo0c000 |
wafaaqainaa warded, aTAeTeTaeaATIT = LF
aeafrtan:, weehr free 92322 1 cdatetatsrartes gira:
qnefafacar: aaearatratt wafer 1 warratearta facataraatit
eaavenay:, Sqfsaqcargeraie: = aTHTaseraleaa, wets
BEXoe auc a
qeces | Udererreaefercan yforeareaeas gaeqaraat wate |

wanaaTTash = aReuratrarht waft

safe wat wT) TY ATA HEAT! HATAT; ATL TATA
‘omiafa wai a’ edaasaefray 1 aaah warhe qatfr | gay
a &faaat: safer: Sfaasracirar, fafracata gary | TTT
divoaaa, ufa aaa, sat faa, F saifeetay 1 saga
staan safaras warafa geqaragedat arta 1 satfaras
facarat @ageray, Tagraay Taft 1 warelaea ITT: GATS TA
Gea Fa warey safaererraeat: HTUTIT TAT | ATA
BarHcay qrasaa safes at cada | salfasaareraarata:
wyaarfafa srafeaae fete saTeaTeaTA: |

TEREAITAMATAATS— BAM AAT: | | seara qafafaser
area fared | anvesta guarafeadt gant aro, ofepee |
afe aqaia aeaa afe gt ofapet, waar wha want
TaITt HEAT FATT | ET arin: arin: | @Reaay: Ta: eaqy -
aT, AT Ta eases Tai: | TTT TTT | TaTTT AT! ASAT: |
wat aq: ofafeerartaca 1 arate ofefaseet ger: oferafa, ea:
taifafaad. 1 aneqrat waeatreTtraht gt aaes TeReTT
wafer i[aaq ? | sera — auf fraser | eeu qarearary
[ atafeate, 92] era eqy-qea' nag: aaeaigerifa atsatta
wa wat ger qeaedif aeafa at adaratg: aT we AsTA

 

aaTeat—1, A, B. C. salat-gap-qrt

--- Page 149 ---
Ra ai feretatt [ sitfatete

[= eccagea gaemt: | aneat [aaa], ce CFT arta
Safa caReAT TIAA |

aaiteé: | eq ata: wate, aaah: werd: Gane
waft waqsra aaaeeTTay, TieeaTT: qaneata, qeTaaearay
afageata ? ara aeeansfieiiad 1 fF afg ? weraReaT |
FAA? Asa TaHeaT at aetaHearar: TheTArT: | THREAT FT AAT
vena’ gana fastafe aeaRearat: afersrineaal wal TaAaAReAT
fandt wadtfa qeeat moat, gat TEAL TAATVATAT. TAT wate |
a FAM TATEAT Hea TAT VATA TTA, TET WoRRQooos |
fataacara afnafrenea vafaario: caettshretag, aa PaaTa Hem: |
FA TA: UNTHAMA TEA THAT TT wafaeqad |

scengrearfateznaatarant artat | afe—
aquiat wancega graftecaat agar |

[ aforaqre:, Yo ]
sara oofefrar | rgasatofasnrerd ead, TeseTeAT-
giefrat fafafa acrearnrafaerrare asset) aaa atta:
caugefaatata: epelfaad 1 afe sore facar fafearftse atert art
asaa, aat aatsieada warmefaaer feara atoratat eft
eReTTTAB It gad | vated eae WsaeTTay Ue Ul

[ qufa-agri ener |

aaa | Ast attra wave aT ATA | aca earara
WIS savaTArTs frases ATs —

ala aad, feat y
eqrarsaestirar fra, % AM |

TI-TE-TI-TA-AaT
N-S-a-Ua-AISAET:, AATRAATE 19 Ul

aarem— 1. D. hapl, addn, : waa [feafia ators aft men eararsrattt
area | qIal adaTTte Heatesarafe art: F...gap ...
eal ad ca Toa] Tha cay eaT

2 ALBLC. D. Frafase

--- Page 150 ---
ere: 9 | aonfin-cerent eaten: RS

afs afenftin:, atrry, frat ofrafes:, qoare:, weet,
fear fin = eae ofeateat: fade, Ah, TTege--aAT:,
Uf S-F-T-A-ATHT:, TAT, ABTA: |

amt fe ata, weet gevagerfr | afrta atery afe ater
qa agave az sft gata: | waged wafa— aeel aqeazearhr
AAT | aT aaa fer qearas ‘Fre THargTt
agen 1 frat ua yeaa: frat qeare:, arat fasweay fae”
gfe qatar: |

ay qawaat aaa — arqiefacrey:, aa feguyacr:
ayer dapaearar sfeaat fayrscuraqennsara sq Tat
araerary ceafa | vaatt a Mame’ facateo fase TcaTeATeATA: |
gaze aaaetaear yafefaatraraaargraeary: | wa I gt
THEA Teas 1 cet [a] sere AT
aaa — aSsahenreaa ara waSTy TSA eeTTA TT
gard | ast a garisufaedreacreae a atrarwagaaft gaa |
ssafirat omeigit a aimaaraafa ica THtereHaTaeacTa
aaamcaaaf a gaa, feaesd airagefafe | wart wat
facarazageae wat nerafafa 1 mar memagarda- [Fe] e
TATaT Fa AtTaTTTTeTaT Aart, at wat Hecafafa | THT
a, Warareaie ya: 1 acgesafteqaizawerafegat ca sa
zaaq adda araafe 1 gaat aarersararfa atratht ard,
ata feata fanfamaris atrarft vegeta | aearearara
wearas |

genre afaaarcar mart 1 aeat— egefafaearae
qaret qatqeat. watera: ge [=IeH feat] fast cai aa
ovat [=aarat] frat vaaranaaiearaat afent waeiaed
sraaea aT | ta Her eISAT eaTaTaA, arfecaes [ara | TeaATTAT
fast facar: ceqsarafefacatza [3 ue” ] | aexAatsf grISaT-
afeattanrearat: [x2’ 30] 1 saateft qatar: farttraaor
catia: ovarfa: oaraafacatfa. tadtaqaufasara, gerfasaar

eareat—1. A.C. D, fatare: 2, C. wErasgtartaztor

3. ALB. ofeaafras 4, B. hapl. om. Yara:

--- Page 151 ---
%o ifaerart [ wifereato

soTatigerat faasa’, qatvram: yeatand gay cae ave
aafeyy yeara: | ra: qeaceurarty ‘fre year: Ste

HRTF SEIT Hheg, TAT: WAL, SATA: |ITTATATATS, feat
aguaeatcrssarta sareterfor [yeqo | waer eater 1 Beat: Foor
maat reqemat [29x] | qataecratatsrreararadt | fercarfy-
saqere sf ferareata:’ fead— afe caatsrancia eararadfercar
mead dar ateaeara: fara eft facareareafer., wera
wean:, epeT eRe pw A) AAaates eave: 1 waehy 7
‘weatsaata:’ [Trerara:, 99] aeaeat arfarat aeare:

ayer: 6 aT geet gare aia wT
aTgeqanfadian: | waft ssa feet am: waVesaaf start
eqra eff aaafer 1 oar eafateat faafera: cer eafrecream gest
waft | mat gaedfate ua a feat. gar seet aes | ae
afeaq asaa’ aati ‘arfacaea fara qea’fa 1 gar farazafataor
aifzea:, aifecasafato at fara fafesd wafa 1 car gacentrta-
faqat dat aca fara a wa aifaes: |

Aaitlacaafaed ated aed HATAT |
[ ageafe:, x. ae |

gearfa) wareqaaa | farareafafeet var fafezaea 1 afat-s-o-a-
ante: | UfqeTaeT HATCHET S-O-A-AITTT., UT WET eae
afa-atar: | afrearaey Sta TY: THAT, ATA TR: TAAVT , TTT
aa: TSsaTATT:, Ti: ah: fantasy, att ata, THe aT: |
varhs sexHeaTTAT THT TET saTaaTTAT ET |

ay fafafa caneqmarmaradeaa a atratf areqea ?
maarareatfaga:— afe gamit waaearfacratia earaaisar-

 

waregi—1. A. B.C. D. at: for faa 2. A.B. D. earat
3. A.B. D. tHeq
4. A.B. C. D, 29fat-gapzafataaertr
5. A.C. D, #ffaa for asad ; B. om. Fad
6. B.D. om. 3am

--- Page 152 ---
gatos | azAITRT: Tefaetara 34

cafadiary oaat oearafacarraa | eamegterat: | eReatrTah:
AMT: ey, Araagawatfcaras Tt Tat wert AaTatT
araagaectfacat A ey gard wt det ataaaforfaerar. |
aaana amare: seed 1 wa? ofa-s-ao-a-arrar sft
afmeqtaca ciara feared afeatraayt = aTTere: 1
aq aT wer: gearfefaqoad | a araeae: afreara: qatfe-
aareat walt | DART geek; TA aysgh s TACT ygyedd |
MT ccogee) HIATT eye tag Lothete: agra afta: Bea
faucet facarrat ageareat safe wert: | eRers garaT—
eaqatualaaen Bart ayy sraraa faaag, epet wafra
T Us yea yeqrardgpfaesa cages: eqqaagey FT ATTSTT:,
aa aeaataattatacar sta |

aearhe Arai Teas A Aaa-AaSs-aeahT | Aa AT ATAT
HT ATT areasfeay saat: HaeT eat Als — AAAI: | AAT
au, THISeAy Tea BHAA: | HT aT sqaderafeaT | Wea
freaaraTaaa aqeafa ‘geet qatearary’ | arafearare:, 92 |
geatfe « wafad ose aifaatqaq ie ul

[ wrataeT: aefaacea |

Ue val: eaReATE GHA fagaa sate aera a sara AAT
meat 1 Tea Taha —
araaay weiaT,
ugaetsiaasaig way |
UA TEST SHH,
FI-TI G, CUTAN TWAT aT ls
area: watt, whats, aTosaTa, ate, ofa-aqe-

BA, PHU, WAT, @ CASYA:, TIEA:, AT |

tareat—!, Bo om.

2. A. B.C. afa for afa

--- Page 153 ---
88 aif rare [ dtfaete

Hy aataafa: 1 aaa roar: mae great] Teferet-
TART AT ARTATGISTTATH TIER: | RTAAATAA: PATCATT aT
agianfatefa ate— aeter ggrrrarfaeatarat ut amar uaefea-
WAM | TATE SAT agiawiranmna aatsrarata Aerafraay
aa, aaa Seat HHeafagnearg fraqd ; afer
qaratearrag.y [sao] aac areata

wa venen faa faa ? vai qamrtadsasaiaar: gar
eqita, weaat fe Rata eq: 1 Aaafer 1 wa gat: ToRaTEaTT
WHAT TATTAAASMHT, AAI | Taya aswel RaeTT |
ATRAVSATEaa Bara | wTAAAVaTsAs at fafaafa
aat afagepagqget: cara str fafertfe 1 gear aegrdtar-
aTaqqusaia faattar = oofadiaet gasaetdiarta faarai
areata aft eq: arfecaer | aesest ga: feat} aaaraar-
qaRata: freaeatta |

ufafaatdtsanesata wri 1 afar faerq: afarfaeta: 1 a:
ATASA | AAVSAY AIEAAISAH ,  ATATATAAAVTSATT ,
SILT fait aT aeaea fate: | faqaequsararaa soto efactaT
at, aTaAnsd [a], ceatfgeta sat afd ar) ae, AaTeoT
qa, Heats ate, wat TaT: aera fae: 1 adaaT-
Hosaregq Mealy wernt faetar: |

af-qegs aamd 0 mfyegarat qaTasela, TA: @, st
[art] faatat; att: e, CHT ATT: | HHT TT, wHTeT AAT wrTT:,
Teas TMs, Adis 1 ae si FTG: qaser fata, et
wit | wa ‘aqaradat @ RATATAT @araenase a Hdeq
wafa, aq fafaia arati’ qaa qa fe: aaragt saq?
sea — TAH TTR TAMA | aiaTeRarAs faetoat ay
qaaaa , aearaaad aazafafs gaa gaa Tater fasafa |

‘afe aiaafa'eaa gag ua saatsfaer: | ae TRI, HASTA,
afagent afa vag aisfaseyq | qayaig— eareqa 1 garter vata,
FHT GE, TASYTA: TTISyaA. | Teqaey wat ahah
arta: sfaraterq— ae2t aaaeateaeqasarrfaeafe | aE:
aged: | aT gee. | ag a ‘alainaicaddag aad gaz

 

eqiwat—-1. A. B.C. D. gap for THAT 2. C, Pearario

--- Page 154 ---
rare: % aateaaearatia 33

vad Fea | ezgeaTIy meat faatafacar aes | TEA ht
series HAT yeareaaaaafate 1 waar fase va fRadfy-
facatfarera aadtft 1 aa eafirar wfafeargarer fra fag
SZaT | seamaeg eafaaraferageaa—

att qrateatet feat Aat aT MeUe zat

[AsIMreHaT, &. uy]
gf 1 cafad acaat atfrarqagq iis

[ w@earaeaaria |

TRUITT FMT faea: Temas | afafeszeara
TIT, TET Ta: BeATNyfT freq: area uT eae
TAG | ATE TATA Hea TATTAT a eae —

TT-ag-ga-ge-gk 7-2-
UTS TTT TATA |
qaqa <a

arate-arga-ea-faey weaeaq lls ti

TATE Tealt afeateaat fee, aaxo-g gaa.
faufaae:, wea, ava, TaTITAT:, afag:, wat, a, at,

at afe ar gar ga fesq carafe ardteafpafsaart,
Aeateay |

TATE Tela] ofaafsaatag vensaraad 1 gare
TERIA aeaTeAITT | wiser aeare: 2 waeaeifarear
fara aatT:, ga-we-aa-qeelarfafe 1 wat garahat
‘AT aac: | qaagaa quer a frakr., ait: at ofte:, peeT
wo seatferg, gut: « aetft:, wh: z TIT | Cattery aa,

 

taTeat—I. D, adds @ after afa

Udo Ro X

--- Page 155 ---
ay atfaerata [ afaate

wag FATT STEM AT carat: araterat et | TIATTATSA
fadraqrafacracoray | ate saaqraret + Pead aeT AAT
saree cada earqi cat a faetorfawet fragt 7 eae,
gemma saATTATSTeT ert faetat wate, fecrarearata fers |
sat A—

AAA WarsgietsravsreTtaey Feta: |
fant aferna: gata orate fedtarsa

aft 1 wa va arar: setfrgar fedtatiar! wafer) aa TeaTTaTT
sana: eyes aie venaaaha aed at aT
carinaty aeat waagar arafeaar eft 1 ae adler wa
qenan:, wera fg aa fata wa a see ‘aeatrara’ sta 1
qaasi agai [ afreafg | arora anata: fafa
eqatan at feat? aeaea, agact afe: ware aefaea: a
eel TAR werTgedaT whe, gay wet feagTata, Te:
cataeareeaces frag: eGeT Wa aaa 1 Tara Teas ITATAT-
fafaeat aot afazfa fafacta qemfafeaa, Afseaa” fafafaaa,
gat aT qasaeda 3, Sararatorafasrat wera | aeATatAag
qaaaa getrarai wfaacagrierar Agr ATATTT  BAARIET
fataseata , aeaat fe ast afrncafaaatsate: cary | SFTeTaT
sfargarq catia aaeTTTATT | TaAT—

azafeaaarfeaaarnialggaraat Qareare: |
aarat mati gaawafad feed 1

cafateagreay saat ATTA Sofa aaTTT
ReTatARae MATA afaetaT

qaraafaartiq— semewafataraay = sezefafedtttea:
quegecrerewaaqeseas: | T ASH qQsQqRguze | Alen

saret—l. B.C. om.: oar [wafta to agarat:] aerat fg, fourth line.
2. A.D. om. Bfseda
3, Boom. : araratarahasat to qaaeda
4. A.C. D, afasrar reat

--- Page 156 ---
rite: & ] ogtearracarittt gy

qatfarraaragind cagafarat ower: aa Tae
TAVITA AaaTAT “araTMsegafefeateadiga ga: | AEHeT
BYOYoRR¥soo | VaTTATAGTET at anTAH yead, WAHT
aif, area at, yueaare, afta: ca 1 wast gare
wear: Taam «aarafsat:, Uaee TEMA: THT AIT
[a] wear |

FANT: THT HEE | crag araepaiad
TETRA AAAI TI-AY-BAYRMAT: | VTE STITT MATT
aetferearn: osaft omar wamaag eqafeyat gat: 1 wa
‘aaa ae, TIT ASAT: Bafa’, ASTI BATT ASAT:
aimedtteyead | varafe saaqaerafeqara ger seo
aegaaary | sar Aart wa wm, st waft 1 salt sfeaaat
Tareas TaraeaH? aret:, TaTfragarsht area aaraeat 7
waft, aa: afergared waeaaTaes feet farcat:, a fafeaaraca |
afargt a ofeaarcd wate amg selad, seit a orf great
gtteaiad, da a orata: fe afasadtfa . oe meat a fafeaerad,
qa afeatgere: 1 aecqacnrara aeareanrayfearerrararazaa-
TATA | aeTAT Maa aTerea afateracacyTsTaarar
Madl aSaad 1 aT aaa a oferta ware ef qaqa.
free: |

afageiat a afagqefaaea, oAist a geri qeray-
BATETATA AesaTATIT:, HAT THT afad, at wscacafaartn:,
qaqa afe mast eae, wat a aafe:, grer gat Wa-
AseramMacy , Te: BA artis maT, wa: feer gaat
vefargat weateaTy | UA AMT Tot aerTt TAH TTR AeA |

saTeat——1. The commentator Suryadeva Yajva quotes the complete
verse as follows :

araranznafstsentaeaqster ea:
at qarfeqrarat faafg: afeasaa uv

2. A.B. C.D. aareqeara
3. C. adds @ after a

4. A.C, aafa a amare ; D. aafa 4 aera

--- Page 157 ---
a4 etiferarten®t [ iferete

mediearat agama wedtearttfa afaaery 1 aatafet | arareate-
tsa Faz, AA—CVASITAATETT AT: ATT” [ aeeTerrat, 4.
9.4, massaaera| efa, carat ‘ar afe at gat Aa faza
AeaeazA |

ga weed weeafafe 1 ae ate af: aeetetey,
ae qaifata arfer aerateafafa | FAA ? goat 1 Mase
aqaay at fe fasat aeofa a ate, ‘arat aTat’ afa a fe
great meaft a wea: 1 caaarfe aearfasiternfa: WETATA-
sftetsaq | wea qavgaaeetaal afar: [ aenrareay | | ua
werats yw att |
aa fefatr aecteanfaatfatear ? seaa— qeneareraraey

aralaz:, Reatshr atta 7 fafeatarat’ safe 1 aft + ge
saaratorfateatate aexararfasseretarat | Tea Talay
afrardiat wedteatft oaafeaardtfr eareaad 1 aera fe ‘aat-
mea: AAS A RATT TAT TATRA Ter ATR TAT EL TAT
ayafeaat:, waaast afsardtat veateartr ‘SValaaard Weal
agafegardifa | Agia ARAVA ACA EAT AQT AT ATAT
qareare aaareaafearrarreraafareaistaeag | aaa

ukesawafteaaiveagi fardifacsaad |

aneagfrazafarary qeat FATE WATT

TaeTtaeahaYSTAAAAT YM AAA: |

agin: afaser sigiarmiva aaa |

aqhatracaapafeagtiserpatferseareteat: |

yaad qrarnt wineaaes:

MATSUI APAAATTTTAATTTTNGAAT |

afadteagd stot fage! an[on?] aaeareg aa: tt

 

wieat—1. C. om.
2 A. amauta; B. ami Gadtats C. anzataq ; D.
qe | Cadat
3. Ay ATaRIL 4. D. ata feat
5. A. B.C. D, om. oT

--- Page 158 ---
ware: Yo ] atmagat: searterafcera: Re

woarizeraninar aedteaat wafer at waa: |
qeavaeatay eteat | MTEH TTA UN

qgar— Aeieartad TeAsaT HeaTezeiatiary TAHTA:
QAR UUTATT ATT: TA WSR oF0 | TAT AWG
yore aaaaraginay eagaeafaaaay cemratat Arata
afar aeat 1 owasrafe afagarasaedaeat, aa
maraceafa acaarar Pacer wedieqeqicaat, 7 afraa waaay: |
ashe gq! araarafatafarat seqdtgad TeacaaaTcoita-
fafa 1 wafaansea atfaargay ue

[ sisaaay, arasitsafzaa: |
ear ensareararra fags —

ataita =| area

UMazs, W-F-7-F-F-H ANTTET |
MITA TT

UATE STAT TAETMAT Ue Ul

alata, weeatd, wfna:, BT Ts | a Us oraaistaaicr-
afaaen:, aaiaaea:, aneward-qs oafaafwat fader, aat
UATE ETAT TMA: |

walfe 1 aeqraifa aratfa t aeaaonit aeaattertearg ait
asa sfacdet | awaufversaaafer: 1 ‘wae
araaateaarfta:’ | ascreatat, 9.9.9, TaSaerarery | gerry aa
waa omfaa: 3, aa aati, atafame arm; qaraaeat
wera afag-aaT ET Te MAT: Teed | ata:
a, atfr sratfa, aedagenaa: 1 qaea yg, acd aratfa, ada-
famgarat: 1 amt: a, acatfe aratht, aeererarat: | HAT zs,
aqan ataifa, fasfseaa: 1 at: g, aca aratia, atafare
wT 1 Ma H, TT aati, arracarhergern:” | alae:

saTeat—1.  D. agar fra:

2. A. aeatftad arena:

--- Page 159 ---
Qs tifererar’ [ sitfrets

qa sad agad, Fett amar: | afsardtat wz ArereaeT: |
TY Wa aaa wear afaaed, gatearafaa 1 aacfeT
maater sft waa TSaray aedleqfagaeat uUfser: AeateaT-
afa'aeat ufreat at ceatfasat sarfasritet ca Tharat PTH:
anata saatdta aaaT aedied gemeqreareaa, ofefascea
saa Saara aufaee fad cifrada 4 caasfsesTsy |
rar oftenaaagiahea sar adisiseagafea: ar sar asad
aa sar aarna alfendt acafetiaa 1 aa midamact ofte-
waaaths satarea getfeaa: aratratzar: 1 Fat qorarcarT-
area: atatqafaaat: aati erat geesgrar aenlfastrarc:
AT HACSSAT TTT TTA:

arensaatara:—at, TT ATA, AeaTH TA AAT ATT: AT: |
we, Tea ataifa, sracafaaar qt: 1 wen, farsarra aratia,
MACAASSAMTAL Aes WATTAT HAT 1 ad, vataefte: erate,
qeqyeraTdiss ae ara? ait: 1 as cafara arate,
calraeahersat At Ae ATTAT greT | afaTe-ga-wy-gqatea-
ister: 0 UTE HATATL-aaTATeaMeT: Tea: TPS HTT T-
qaaa ATT: |

weary sft amet seaaiiciva® fa fartafrad
RaraTaTa aITafa— Mearears we: Mere ef | acarsasTassaT
seat | Tiare GATT | TARA AeA gar: fafacer: |
matt aera: ale aeaa, aeneaee: afsar, adt wre: ae:
aaa ATH Te TTT: | wae ga: ere: Uh ye-pT-T-aT
afa | ut meagre: alae ala: | watad aaa aaa 1 qo UI

| graqaat: araaleafzag: |

wary wa aeatisreat fediaagararitisaraestarare—
Reid | S--d-F-8T
afrul fedia ve aq a |

aqreat—-1. A. B. azatsaraeafa ; DD. aratarafea
2, A.B. C.D. att
3. A.D. Fa aitstea for veaaitstey

--- Page 160 ---
gem: 99 | gran: aagitsrafcaa: RQ

H1-U-FA-BA-SANETT-
waar , fies garqHTaTEcaT thee |

ward, F @ aT st swarataafmarts, ata, fey,
2, Ada TT at oe ea wareafrafearta, sara, sftera,
frfase ofaafer:, eargReat, wea

wad ata waieafaygere wearfegeeaat sara: we
offaafrar qrarr: | ada anisarrafetia:—aaer se, TS4
atatia, gifaefacartarm:, ami: @, 2 ara! ag ara: |
EIT @, Ovary availa, cartfaarm:? 1 ad: a, get
alata, cefargia: | oat a, agen araift, aeeaeareg
STAT: |

afeot feta ow agi wi Ta dar a afer: | afro ceraaq
afwafaat: ayerq, Fa satdar afaatfer 1 afeores qa-ay-
erTema: | aad afeaa: | fede o2 sat a 1 Ft gal
fafeat: Rea: sear wee geg? great: | Aat facta
agar: Tas sfeaatsrarzatheehaes | fedtraqeteea fete
qaimafentat fase: | sare: fedtg a agdy atest
agar | ,

waai— afeot feet a2 1 wt garaat gar: fade ce ahent
wafer 0 vat af wedterk | aq a arazemarat hae
afro ggsred, da wedeaer fads? aasfeard sai, aq
ead | aaafer | afeoit fete oF gare eff areraateay
“aaraataarsy fatisafacsea” ofa faatsaearea | sez
free: ? atetsafediart waei aaratat aaafenatrerd faire |

sat 7
waearagad ofadtd da steiteara 1
[ Wt, qe |

area—1. A.B. C.D. ga araifa 2. D. warettfirain:
3. ALB.C. D. searn a ay ag
4. D. weatatard

--- Page 161 ---
¥o freed [ sitferrto

sft. agian ce ofeaa: fede aga aoe gra: 1 feta ca
qe aan fearraraerarta—

sam arafaata feetaqameg aarteTa |
agama 92 agaseaqzarfa un aft |

ato a oa ett oateteara  fedteagdat: gam:
qfeaa: | wa: st, weet ataifa, vefameara: | gel: 4, THAaT
araifa, acanfte: antarmn | eae aa, varSataa arate,
gaiae fangat wat ATA | qa: wa, acatearrseraifa,
ad yeqSaragat wasd arTAry |) qaeT ea, catafaasaratt
famgat wd ard AMITATT |

geareatena | waits areiearfafa qatar seareererfata
fariaren Fareaat arafa— weitere ae: wert sie |
qeaGNesqses HAAS — TIA FeaaHH, Tea WiaAH,
qaivaad, aaaeat alent | oat ageget wert | vias
afefafrearg THAT TA |

ay sfrassarfad aa adfaeaia, aetare—tafaen garq-
aeanent i aafeameaatfa teaecacafeatfa [ 3204 | Fara
HEAITATT | BH: Y:, BATT: WaFaeel aAVZ:, TRTTARAT BEAT |
carat agnerearararrsaa Tat raat aga fara
afaat yaar salfasaafad sreaa 1 KarqHearsarTatefeaear-
SATTASMaIUaaaaT TAT gaeaT: TAT |

RAPHE: VaHH—Aselorr wrmreTisa TATA faatter
ag Rariseart: ging shaw we FargRearay sreagfraar:
qread, aa eT avagata: wT armare: | aa afeerferat’ Tarca-
wat qfat arate farsa 1 aerrdtsrpay | sad areata:
wai fare —

aeufacga mi mead ARTATAT |
aatatermanag faateat & asters: 11

asauaforen fest: Meat: aagarfeua:
Ree agultta froonxanagad 0

eaeat— 1. A.B. C.D. osfererfira

--- Page 162 ---
reatet 42, 12 J agtaafavaratts ¥4

qERIEA:, HA Fee wate aT
[waraTemaay_ , . 49-98 |
ofa ama Taarqaa Wee
[ agtanfasaratf |
WaIaaeana, aaa satsfaaea fread saraatarsArE —
ate aie aie aie’ afte af
ale cer eats eon aie fees |
sale fa aaa aie fas
UBT ST TT EF RATISM | eR Ul

‘weqraat fawtdaq eareqtar: | wendear | weareT at:
HASIeT SATASAT: | War sar farcatwareafefaar; 1 wedsarfada:
WAAL: FATASATTFAT 1-2 UN

[ anitfangaiftaanaq |
amitiaarqarhara saree Aas —
aaitian are
qa WITT AAT |
neaTataAa
a ata fara wo mM u e3 Ul
wa ofearanitfaar aenitfast Tea 1 ure eeitfre'ga
“qugateay 1 of? aR 1 aarnt “afeafraerqentaza aa

awA— 1. D. few
2. In place of #74 af, the commentator Somesvara reads
ata faer 3. B.C. afer
wareat— 1. B.C. at for & 2 C. om ¥
3. A,BL.C.D. 4at
Wo We %

--- Page 163 ---
¥R aifanraia: aareet:

Tega waafed, weaferegeate aT qaqa safafe 1 aia
weak qaeateay | araain yeafeafracarafer vat =H
ifaragqa aAteae qreaheay | ISAT ATT WISH Wer:
afer mrt ty aeafet AAT, ATTA, wart egera: ahaa.
equal Treat:, Ts watt aTAaT 7 afcaanaiy fact of ae
af vat max aad awitfrwqariard seated aratfa @ Tt
aa arti 1 eau

anrifrntgarat sareatat renter Arafat
sfarad sare aat fg aaragqaa’ aaa ul

afa areatea Bal

qaTifany yaaa teat afzanrar’ i

eqveat—1, 2,3. B.C. at for
4, A.D. arfor®; B. om. F
5. C. ada yaa 6. A.C. D. % for Ft
7, A.C.D. add the following post-colophonic scribal verse :

mastatarafafasarat qerddta fated war ag t
aeadara: afeaata iar Tater fe 3 fade

--- Page 164 ---
‘aftgarqi: .

[ aReracta |
UAT AEAT TATA RATATAT
Asya’ fagarygcaraarary |
AEA AHONRATT ATTA TSS
qaieagraa wa: fra nai
ararafancratfacRaueed wHNZas
asa agarcarefana ate agrd FETA I
acatatizamatifagneqdeagegar
aareatd Tenzassagar fefearrat freay 2 tt

[ sfactaaegida: |

ma! ooraueyarcfarafafrege = sartar— aid,
arafaar, mat ef ataanfind ag fefad aay afafasey |
afeeraavate fefaay 1 afe: qatt:, wTaat Bra: | Cares
aaa say | ATE A—

aaa quamatia era wl aqeqray’ t
ward aitentraraarat feanfed gates MeAR

aaTey As:, WAT: orarrar ht | aft a— sage wea
Vaal THAT, TAT ag wear 7 1 Ferarfer Te AsATFATaT

vaTeuT— 1. A. C. begin this chapter with afz: sfterraat wa: 1 BE.
begin with nat: uu aeTATSAT WD. begins with aft: 1
atrogaaaa: 1 afaerreg t E, which does not contain the
Gitikapada, commences with the Ganitapada.

2. CE. ata: aatit (wr.) 3. B.D, E. 98
4. C.D.E. add a after 74 5. C. Weea
6. E. Taya:

BR

--- Page 165 ---
we afer’ -T aferte

ant save fart at, aar agat agai a tise cat fant
aa: aap agal age aqorisa sqsufee: | gare’ gearae ae
aart: Wad | aa Adtegrarafey aa arfraaerecafa? at
3 ofeqgtar waft 1 gave at wagaqgey’ | yeersaes
Set arnt, varat yerft we 1 wearfe setagrarefe[g] as
aifracreaedisraa: qTarea Therese | was area, TH aT aT aTIsfeT
aTfTTHTT: Ast TAATCATHIST AAT aT eT MALT |

aaay wa at ofa ofeactitar ? aa again: Ta
afnat oat faafrert | eat a yA aaler We eat | ae aT
gave orafaa: | aa agate frafrares ait:, Ta ge. THa-
amt: | ward ogede: date srafad: 1 sara ofearz
seaa— [ vmarefaert waesata famearsaaearfir 1 |’
qarerate: qeaay:, freareragatr: | aatceares: Ge etaeT
fanaa: | farfrarter agate: carat ef 7 ate: | wa eae
afd oftere: 1 urfrafina ofeareree wea: HUTT | AIT ATE —
“afod ufaata™ fear’ | va actiefery—

wu: aad Tefa TeATeTA: Hee

afte fasarea — ufaafnd aaninay | apMT_sATreAr
afrafaier: ufanfnashefgar? sdiearates: aanfrs | aed
cease daria ar wat afer) ataewoaiad aq ata-
aint wa) “qe weciafead, aarft ata a auaratie-

 

zaqreat-—1. Mss. wa for wat

2. B.C. D. hapl. om. of aqataant; C. hapl. om. of aant

3. E. adds 434 after 7 4. B.C. D. at; E. aa

5. E. eaeq afa:

6. EB. aererae: 7. B.D. hapl. om. of a#

8. E. hapl. om. of araaqerat

9, A. B.C. D.E. read : amaagerta aqasat faafa
aerate |

10. B.C. aed Hwitay 11, Mss. areTetat

_

2. E, wftarfafgar:
13. B.C. D, gap for taafnd wt 1 a

--- Page 166 ---
rere: 4] sfraraacg fader: vy

sfacracafafe a ate: 1 vasa wiigieated! oaenuifesfe-
qreacay i age afafasd, aah atari, ag afafaseq | sad
Tira | araheatttat ta TaatrzeaTH:

maraaane: meaareary: Fate esetaqrearat fz

AIT TAIT: —
Ta-F MA-Ta-Ty-T-
SHYT RT-ATUY TACHA |
araucteeae frat
seaseatad aay tle tl

wen TeMTeTaT | evetaararrat fe waar ways: earfa-
afrascarafraraat fear fafrefa 1 raat earaT AREA
AGAUAATHTTUTCTY Aatat saat saraaat Fat, mae
carat aafesat gaara: | wear grantor tana feaerra-
wears sega, taniyafearaer a faarar amare Se:,
Tasea ysat aH ToMEG? HEA | MAeeTUTAT Tanfe:, at
‘arercareareaarat qamfet TeaTe aHeRAATA Ta! | TUTE
qwaaakeqateaanlafraearreargy weasels THCHTIA | TAT A
Hea’ oat se gare qqes cava Haas Tere Ry aI TAT
BUfa-ger-yy-eha-Fa-TERTT- ATO: | MT CATA ae F-wflt-ger-argy-efa-
FATT, sree TIT: | ATi satis afeararsa hy,
Si THT TTT: | Aza Tee aATETTETyY aeeF aq’ ata Paar
Te FeaTa: to ardwe gfe eqearfrertarear targa fegsreaty-
arte: gaa: aeetaeatafs 1 aa aecareear aya fer areary-
arfeoitat satai Sad ae: wafe a aaa wa: eaaafaaray |
Tar “atfeeat ga area” eft [wdeeag, 9.9.99] 1 ‘q-aee-
Mager | [ ‘geese: ] wey qt sastafa | feet aA | gqH-
Rseafad may | Hat qefagad, aareatad ara frre

aeat—1. B.C. D. E, wworacfice

2. D.E, td for a 3. B.C. D. om ¥

4, B. om. Way 5. B.C. D. E. read Waa
6. B.D. E. ead 7. B.C. DE. & for aq
8. Mss, read a1€aT:

--- Page 167 ---
¥ erforern’d [ site

wanqaa— wa feet variqafaara: Hqagefrarfahe: afafa:
gfae:, qeafe dfan-dne-atass-dig 1 ate— RIAA
aafa fa ug

[ dgenenafierna |
aeeareaa STATA ATS —
we TAM AU 4

aed agaad qt 17Ay |
HARE A Tee

cata SMa TATA CAT U2 Ml

meat TSeregraiha THEM | ATA fg aeeareata
Freonratane qetfrafata: cary | HAA? STATA EAT ear fet
agha earafacearfa wafer | acat FA: eqranetaat adage fare
ay qanda fatdfad ware |

us a am aNd @ BERR CATT THAMMAAAMMT sanfada-
garaagaitr cararfa |g qraget 1 agafaga agd a fagt 4
agahgy | agar asad earTy | TAMA WATT | fagaea
med eaTay | faye wer: | wer Bata THOT TATED AAA CATA |
amaaar: agen atfe:, azar! MeSH ea TAT Ad, Fle: |
aaan, maqea Tay TATAT | qmpleaisday’ | Fe, Feaey TTA
tarry | atest Faq |

emarent aes ea | eaTaTeeaTAmeaT caro eaafe-
aferaerard gat ear ary wadifa arad | farafaa’
yert 1 aq a ocarhe carat HAA TATTTAT |
qavarsaeyragreres att gar aft eqrarfaeranaany |!

 

eareqi—1. B.C. D, eararat 2. B.C. DE. aga

3. A. B.D. add here #aeaH

4. B.C. D. om. Feat: 5. B.C. D. wae:
6. C. om. 8

7, B.C. D. E. read aereraetat

8. A, aacyeit; B.D. aacarrat

--- Page 168 ---
wre: 2 ] atiaferd o

ga: 2 ear cart ae earfeertarfafeat, afafgaeara-
qfeager fageatq 1 ag ate eararceat aa eariae-
aera 1 ouardlfe eararaer merredtargaria 1 aaates |
a fg qanre: daafrarat aaorgarset ay: | Ad faaagt | azar”
aangarern a facde afe catfeqrarrart: = aEerraredar
fase | eararceard amnfafa carfersearat: earafrert-
aratarrfeera, srTatTarareT ASeATAST |

waaay Fat caTATAy wles:, eH eI TT TT Aza
4q wate i seat saeai caramel ararat faaeseszaaraar: eq: |
aoa a fraeraiset ag a eae cd wats almeragraeqarara-
sae: | ty ay: 1 eat saaferetft warfr emratia satay
fa afe &: ? arf sfaaraeat Searraearaa | aerat aad cararta
THT SyHAATA: 1 SATA TATA

9000000000
RU
[ anafcaa ]

arr ica reararara tga Pears —
ait MHAGET Te F ATTRACT aT:

at: awn sf: ain aaacrfafe gala: | aaTTaTe:
saat aq aise [aajagqen: aafaae:, a at. | aTAGwraa-
fais: dst, at: dati aa afrasahea soart gaa ‘ae:
wages: efi aar atafrest aaza: sft) weraa’ aTaTy
anageaaars: aq adearfscearfe aaa y: | FaTeaaT-
fseeq anaguadafanser ataaag: ? seat Tear

 

 

eqremt—1. B.C. hapl. om, : tata [*** to tarare | below.

2 E, at

3, B.C. D. E, read tatata

4. EB. om, *ataea talatat o 0 0 © © 8 oo OO

5. B. om. g@ 6. B.C. D.E. read afar
7. B.C. DE. wary for wraatt

--- Page 169 ---
¥5 aforaate [ afarere

  

¥

¥
afta: 4 < > afte: 2
¥ u ¥

anaqeraafaaseates (Thera: 9) | fganetsaaaey’ TyATaSA-
feaqearer (aftera; 2) |
gidarad #1 aia: ? weaa— ‘wat a agasaes aw,’ ale
qangaea dat, Het CATA, 7 aeag way) aa ate? aet
waery, ah anaderagesatafaas eft | Aaa qeraseeateat
eauisaT ara aaeaa THAT TTA AAT TET ata faseat | Ha: f
afasarsearsarea tga: | waar aa aT Taararefatnseer TATE:
gaa anagenia gaa 1 waaageatareg arparistea-
eqPaTHaAAgTTaT TaAAITA Gy. | TST: | asaft at at:
a aAFaTaaEAy | TaM— aAAqesraaafser AAT fanz
faragsafaearearana seat araTageaatarhr qeqHorilt
qfeactag | aad ofeaferragqersasgeaata rags TAATTA
ad nensafaest! 1 aedaraageaaannizatt:, 8 ATT
araaearaa wat | faqahata ama, walrTATeacany
faqaea | slaatascaraara’ a sant faera—
a ¥

’

 

 

afzera: 3
a
sqteat—1.  D. om. feanzaeetaes and the figure.
2. B.C. D, om, auteat 3. E. wt: fermarg

4. B.C. asd ¥ for aeasafasse 5, E, seqara

--- Page 170 ---
ane: 2 ] atafend ¥e

weag Bat at: aHAquaatalaay: | Us Ta a aqNadeT
vat: dat gf ava aaaaqeaey aan freead | aarer gat
TaUsIH | WAAT AMET A AGA A AMaEnZaH | ATMsIET
dat: | dat arat grat efregdar ef qatar: | aemandad:
GA TT TAATWIeT | TIMI Baa’ Wweargawd HITT |
aaa fe ait: watfeacrgaat: Fat: we sreatia 1 aaafea 1
af wart weadtayfeereaaicare ata 1 a watered
qigarad |

eh: —

vatfeaarmat ant tar gen gay ae
MAU aw at aed eae awe TN

TATA — 9,2,3,%,%, 805,85 WANS By, TARA
FATT ¥RY |

maesertaerarcaat wat at ‘agaeser dat’ afe
ert ATT,” ANT — 9, ¥, 8, VR, BH FE, WR EY, 54 I

reas aarorft qarfn—

wraqaed a at gear feqot ata ateaaag 1

Requgmeaateamd aifaedt 1

aft, aarferararat samt ataseqt seat | Fa? aaaTaT
TASeMTat Tas TASeGT A WATT FARAH | HEATH TA:
aa maida ayTaTA |

eret—1. B.C. hapl, om. : [dat efar'to das] dant aa,

third line.
2. E, gaea tad 3. B.C. D.E. read geqa:
4. C. om. ¥ 5. D. aset at 2fa aear aat
6. E. asgat: 7. B. wa dat; D. Eg. wa asi

HAtto Ro wy

--- Page 171 ---
Yo aforerare [ sfwae

igraqaraea Ae: GVM; MATT AAT JHTA NERY |

farrantsaata? 1 far age paa gaara: gam
qay aH HAT Zcufwatorinirates weet farrat:

Seah —
gout aaguint ead a TSaeTTAETET
eafgauea aw afe aia sangre ku

ATG — & q R
4 4 4
¥ yu a

RUA — ‘Bayt ATL eft *31 vag: Bate wrgat:
gre TAA TMT YE, RE. aaufaatntrairat gat Tet *s
va Taree TaTASeaA’ | ee UR

a4
ay <4

[. aaafenn |

gaahe ear ee Aaa Tas
azqraaaal TAIT TANT: FATT Ml 3 Il

faguaaen dat: | aguaaeet: | aqnaadatt at wate |
gat are aetaareare eft wate 1 a 4 araattft: ( @TeT
waa acy aise arama, ema wag ‘serra TATTATT
saeq sfrareafa 1 aaafer 1 aeatoria ‘aareed wey TAT

sarem—1l. E. om. Wa to %¥er¥, same line.
2, E. om. Wa
3. E. om. ara to 7§
4. C. Batata: SE. arazerea?:
5. E. om. the figures following.
6. A. B.C. om. of 7. D.E. anata
8. A, B.C. D. read aqaagea for aeuaareata efa Tatar:
9. B. om. Faq 10. B.C. D. om, qareg

--- Page 172 ---
xvire: 2 ] era ferret 44
anager wage wa sfagay | ga: ? aqMaqdayt gaa
AAATAAAHACT AcetaAaMaATMAT sola Ase, FLATT aane-
yaaa wy | Aaa ‘at: aaa: = saarfsse
THATAITATATS, WAAL AeA HaTeag aT Teatfyrear: 1
BETH: —
cafararaat eat F at gaq afe
aeererReried maeRe: wae 1 8
ATH — 9, 2, 3,8, 4%, &) 8, 5, % 5 AVATCSHTT: Wore ;
MATH: HT: FC0E2Y |
varfetaraat ‘aemaadant wa: gfe wareetq seer
FAT, 9 5 WG, SW, WRK VE, BRR, KVR, RZ
mathe aot “omaaen aa eq” gears aaay, aT-
Hara TATA aAHAAT | HI: 2 afaalarat sAaeearat wat
aecaraey saageaT eae a gaat | aeerseHaeT | a: |
TSSUSWORSTE, MAMET Ha: HATH ve qoVEvvwoyszoERy |

farraatsaata | sete: —

sarsaemeert aaqanifadantnaary |
waaeent az fawd afe sanfod afafarer ny
UH Y ¥ @ ¥y
4 ¥ 8g
% rn 5
Weal: TATATSCAT TAT. —

185 141° RVvo M65
qou 9° R38 934
841% ARX = Yooo 442

wTen—I.  C. afar 2.

 

E. om, the entire nyasa.
3. C. om. BT: 4. BC. D. om, a4
5. E. om. the entire nydsa,

--- Page 173 ---
 

XR aferaat [ fae

[ sige |
TAMAS | —
at etzanifed fads aaa |
ANE aw YF Ay eaaeat Faq | vl
tat gfadsancadafafs qatar: | at at, eta TRA |
HET tava syd — sang, T TH: WAT, TeATeATT |
aa afore faa cara? at: 1 acta var! fauna staf’ aaa afer
an egy’ ad fe fart ad a carry Fa aT atfecare—
fred fagea niet dla ser aa feqay) fey ag? aTATT I
at fate aa 1 we GaeTerye ae ae ated
Us aed erat aaa i anifgracatag , TS aT atria Feaet:,
yaa weet TT earaeat aaadat vals | eaTaTeraegTa” TATATFAR,
afery earareat dea waren qaaaT | Aa A: eaTATaTAg 7

faad, aa ser gaa TeaaT | HA: 2 CAATALEATATATT | Tae
qa oa: gaurd araeafearared aha aa he |

STATH:—
cardtat aa anit qaqerareearary |
geet ae are WeAATAaTAT 7
PFOA: — 9, $s VEs VK FE VS HW FT, ERK |
Tae TIT curser araatta TeafA— 9,2, 3, %) ¥
& 9, 5, 8 BK
‘ATA SeeTH:—
gun gagaiat ananmat [a )]agaainrare i
fare Maye qe ATATAATZATA wz

eqieat—1. 6. Hapl. om. : [army's | art, same fine,

 

2. B.C. om. arate maareare ; D. gap for the same.

3, B.C. fasaeara 4. C. a for aat

5. B.C. om. afafrd 6. Cy aneqra

7. D. ara card 8. E. om. the entire masa
9, FE, me Freq 10. Mss, read # for 4

--- Page 174 ---
wire: x J CTT at

Rare:— & 93
q ¥
¥ gy

SUA Barges Hat ae wesq 1 aay
SALOR 2 | waaiterseget ere: gaa TSH. TTS Sahay sae.
ufaqaea are PrratyaTT » anemat aagaatarai®

4 farartaary 2 uy i
3

[ sage |
TATA AT —
arate wg feta
Aya var yeaa |
6 SoA
anergy tiga:
MET TATE TART TATA HY Ul

TTA: aA, TeaTE eA [MAE] TT Sta, wT TREAT
faery: | WaTeAT AeA Hea aTS— hae | sat TTA TA a: STS TAY |
ET Cia aa Ue: sraaarfaegera— ‘atfeagaying: Wea: wraTe
Tarfa'fa samrsafafa:, oaara asrg feetrarfa’ fa faettoraafata: |
WA: gate ua, fediaearama | aaare fadiorrafae Fa art
sthacare— fain caer aerators ait yor er faye: | ae? aaET
Warat: | aT fay waea qaaio| aiferqighneriter: seara 1
Tifeafa: ga = ofnar afra: faydgfora: 1 wea at: 2 crreafe
TTT: | Teg: | eearfaaer: 1 camreeafefa aeacritay | sara
wary rary Mean: | Ra: ? MATE FARATATE | aa TAHA

eareat—-1. E. om. ata: to Fey 2. C. getenatz
3. E. om. aa and the figures following.
4.0 C. tareseat: 5. E. qeftgaia for qa
6. Mss. corrupt: B.C. D. E. aatearat (C. adds 9) ATEN AT
7. C. adds 4; E. om, farmaiqay 3
8. C. TA TeATT °

--- Page 175 ---
Xe arforaat’? [ «fort.

wacerentaay | wave aaufe qeear va cal araaarfata
fan aa qaeaeaTe aaKa qdaa gata, Fava sarsaleT
gaat | ad: adfaanratqaqafead wafe, ‘MTATe wae
feetar facarke |

SqANH:—
aatdlat at aacietat gag & afe |
acafeagategat gare TIATATY Ny Ut
FATA, Fs VW, HW, FRA, VUE BBR AVR GRY TORS:
aad TATA AMASETT 1, RF, Vs Xs GS & VR
sqaTH:—

PATAAAT ATA fer aVey esa TAaTaIeT |
at UAE MAR AE MAMTEATYATTMT I

PATH SVAVVERSLY | Ase FATAT QoRy |
vang frre qararaasagary —

qa adamat waaaidfragucael: |
afrarai‘ feared famqat aseqat army 3 tt

4% . x
ATi — FoR 1 AH AAKAR 2 UX
qR4 %

[ faynetanca |
aa’ faysaanaraaraare’ —
Erase aT aR GATT: |

sqreqt—1, E. om. the word nyasa.
2. B.C. D. om. the word 44

3. CLE, aaanfq—saear: 4. C. aararat (wr.)
5. E. om. the nyasa 6. E. om. Wa
7. Cy qaamng

--- Page 176 ---
rete: & | faqueta wert aX

frat ast ara ataea afed ad fay) qaT ag: qTe4-
fafa qatat: 1 aa atf aarfs aa-feaa-fasation 1 ‘faased’ fe
faqsaamiirryiact nara ree: | ata faqaea | Gane | HaeT
TAL FATAL) HATATPATT: | ameratenyaeteiat: 1 amaeandy,
yaarae: | wa eea— aa ae aan: ag waza, AAeaT arat
aera aazaaletfa aciafer | det aa-feageqsretaaita nofafs:,
aq faynereraaer | AeA Ga: qAaeallearaaaraMeAeT AT
gaat aaa wera faq seat a eqeta pafa aarafy
aa ‘eaaetarnt waraad frata) ga? “weg Pea age fat-
eaiat arafear’ sft yar wet asa) waa’ asst
aat arg: oreafafa arareaa® aarnt oreatat sfarat sara
fafrset va’ ast fered, asredifsar 1 “Caraeaateaies faargse-
fasora’” aft) aa aft qarasa: atonfes: sfaqaer:,” gezyr
fe “amFAssaT creggarsay.” [ weztears, 3. 89] aft ast
geaen oTas fraraarar aaged a aeqa | aeAT WHIT we
aaa | aHeraleat qqrder az AAT: araaataadaat:,
faasaen BATU Tals |

seeen:—

waeranarat eam ame wat gt
WTR TA Geyaeeniageae udu

 

 

ete :—
e Cc
9
afcerg: ¥
sateat—1. A. Hapl. om. [weatteq: add] saree
2. C.D, afer 3. A.C. D, 2afir
4. A. safe ; E. om. saeretaroi 5. D. wa for qarer
6. E. om. araraa
7. Cy faferszim®ta; E. om. va
8. B. fattorafacsee 9. A.B. ofraened:

10. E. om, [34@ua: to Ga Yok JATHTTATATE AEH, p. 57 below.

--- Page 177 ---
ae afmaar’ { afore

arf atfir aware
feaneatia eara-—

x %
afte: ¥

&

SUTH— “qnenfaata etararenafeata:” gfe yeqerararay : 1
‘gaa aarat. aides aad: a.’ [afrto, qe] ef asrateat-
dat mint: | aa, tata wtanieees 8S aratatetad: 3§
amare aug: 3 eft 1 qariafe aor: 731 aa, seu

aantsedtia wet dana ‘aaarmendtat, sft Pea: 4h
2ae

4q
agareis anaitata saraseta we [wT oes], TT: 421

fgancafaetacarta “amaraataateata:” eft araret 3,
aTaHlal TaRrrag vw, BAT THT HUTT 42 I
SqCTH:—
wut gt an fafacet aret [a] zea ater stat!
feared aaa aed HAAS TIT TU

eat —

ufzta: <¢
at
aed Gea TAT vo |
fasafaysatda ata: —

aoermtant art Sead at acta
fecafaquer ae BTEC HT WATT 1 8

--- Page 178 ---
gen: & J faqaaanay ys

Fae —

aftaa: v
4X

au qwaaiars: alat aaa fatwa
HaaTeaTaATaT aa SaTa AAT | AAT TATA RTT AT TAT
faasy mat yarae aa | ‘oad a afaa fate
[afrto, 2¥] 1 WaT BAT BATATAGT AT ASA | aTSAT ArateTeTT-
mareat fagafaqsrer qnaeraleqaaay | TAIT waar
FES, WRI TaatfaT: ve | Aaaalaa: 25, aatfase: 2 |
aaizeare afr [asatatiaars: |) qareraeTATTTATAT YEA qy,
Waa Tt Aes v, AAT WaT ae aaATA ‘gaya dra’fafa qc,
qo aafata qari orarareat <, yl Careat faqoretacaraza-
TaRATTA— TIT] Bl ATMA AISMATALT wear
AHAAHAST YR; ATIAMTATAT HY TSATALTAT AIssaTaTeaLy Teer
aa anaratet 921 we ‘ameaHarqartaat, ef qr yf,
TEA TS wo, AHATHaAa aaa Sh GAATTTT ov |

BqeTH:—
aay aa aleana aarferat waa af:
faafata: ian’ faanfaqaes fe ge aT Yu

eaTa:—
Ro | TC
afta:
aq

weet gant aratareat qe, 34, aneaatal 42,
BH RoE I

 

earegt—1, A. B.C. D. read only qT 2. A. fgat
3. A.B.D. staar

Uo Ao

--- Page 179 ---
ke afore [ afwrete

[ ssfiaanaq |
igamaTaaasaeag faysetacara tears are —

aera a aa: seh ig ul

aeaqu sare Seora:, aa sha away, TAH ATTeT
a aa: BEATA TTT, areata” seduaracdantle | a ot: aTHa-
fafa araq, aa Sef: | TetaT cere: Gehr: aa aT Pati
Sarat wagedyacdaniatats TI TTA, A att
ait) aatdat Parad fratataedqorrarma | at? wea
aaraaarTa Tae | Tea — HEFT fg arm aaner sear af
yeaa tot a faaraferaca® oy wieneaaarel: quraaa eater
aie: asamiqatatearearcay | daray aerfrry— ate
faasetaraaradet fayrtaarg ter aal TAT faamdaareea-
asernearaararey® fear atgicta | raenuiymatiedriera-
frat maareaea fran ats aratfafgaa | at Tae: aRa ISAT:
aaaiss stat: a: | afta, qe | afa, arf partir
anasarufrar aaa’ [afirto, 2&] aft aI

SAAN F—
Resa grawiinarisae AAT |
seamerafeara eqzazaraea A TA 7H

eae. —
afc: &

48

 

 

 

sureat—1. .E. commences again after the long omission.
p. 55, footnote 10.

B. hapl. om, of saasiaat:, teat

B. hapl. om. wea [***ata], same line.

A. B. ret 5. C. om, Re
A. aeqeqiqarased ; B. aearqearaHey

D, om. Fava: to FTA following.

See supra

a eS)

--- Page 180 ---
vere: & J asfiraanery RS

aerg— afe astiaemancaa [saaraha] sETaaT-
fergaemancion: prt wea, dar sefanentaraaraga
fear wor af | aufaatathasararst atacaa;—

afta: qo

 

<5 25>
aufamaTTey qos, q¥v, 3 1 f Tar, ww: |
wartsreaae? [ewT: | ve | gare au: seaaafeqafaua-
[aaa yor} 1 atae: qoraifaare: sedqorat: | Ta eg 1 Ta
seater gan: wararfefrat sastiraear | tama [FUT | 355s.
Uareat aanTaarerrataena = samt sat vate
aifmeaa aeireara gat: acitfarsafaain fgaa 1. wet aaH®
BUT! VIII’ I
sear: —
wveran wetat weer syqrewea fafacet
seayaminam fara ae at uzu

raTq:—

afta: 149

45

tareat--- 1, A, DLE. aa: 2. Mss. aa 7
3. BOD. E. asad: ; CC. wearer:
4. B.C. D.E. gap: aa ate
5. C. waa 6. B.C.D.E. awat

--- Page 181 ---
Ge aforerare [ afitte

EAT TAHT BVT: 2qq1 Hanh yaaa ase
HIF, FoRRGSR IZ

[ qaaanaa |
ay FAaaHATAaAT ATS
angina Bears TARA |

. afeong: fer: | aaratat ofcoresy aaafeme:, Tea |
aa grea fang gafea— an: afeorel weg ataer TT AAT,
acardfafa 1 avi atanarder aa srs, aea-qrarta’ ane
Tramecy etarfyearara 1 facerat cara:, acare facta, ta ga
facneunigeg , fasneareqirafafa oat 1 yaareacoreratgenrey
sfaraeay  aerar crarentnaiqatraa: feat arrfeorgented
fasneardgata qawey, arergaateaciae | a, waafea, Trae.
sameqa ‘sandgiateaasgo afray sfe 1 sagrarat Wea,
farq aarserfeafafa 1 aenrearatorarat, aeanfraraaacay
areatafe |

BeITH:—
wecgramazer: fememrearaat AAT TAT: |
ast anaenat offense & gan afg nu an

TOIT —o, 18s &

afta: 92

aareat—1, A.D. E, om. 94 2. A, C.D, aeaqardta

--- Page 182 ---
were: 9 J TATA a4

weet aufrHa aera iasaragicizsaroraarseat (Tht,
qo | waar: Theat gar ay Re qs
53 RV 434
EVR RRA RY
waATT HUTA — TaTferrsemaafs feewearesh AAA ¥
atta cerraferreeait 93 afd aaa WAT Yo

BAe Vek
ces RH

artst HUTT AeA: oheaarasetay FI
493 25
a4 RvR
RRA qRXo

[ Maaanaa |
TARATTT AT TAS —

afaaqed et samterna feaye U9 tl

afeeaata gate fra trots qdaaer acne afer |
fray ATH ET TT aaa Te ea ATT aforatifa
aad | waar aq aaa, foray afaaaareaafaestnent:, aber
Be, HITTITE a Waar cea ae Ufray | fae at far
qaeatala fare) aga: dane yafeanr! seiner ofaaae,
aereecitat qa ataa | | aa: gaeit axotaraate: saat
weds dana wegg 1 vanaagissziaadad Fanaa: aan
afore sft | aaearat wave waitea:, wat ad, waiter Gat
mamanag | farateq) a fafsaqata ator fiesqe | Parte
Sao same Eras a at sae faxaae wate, sara
afar ae RAT —

amare fae aaqhraratyses ania

afe |
tareat—1, E. ast for vast 2, E, sarareat

3. E. om. *87 [...22¥¢] TAHA, below, line 13.

4. The commentator Raghunatharaja uses the form ygafifaatey

5. Mss. read fafaroga for farsqa

--- Page 183 ---
£2 afmaare [ afrre

‘sqerT:—
gt asa aut aefmeatar star sa qeTATy |
aamanaraat fragt waar 7

*aTa.—

oO

afar: 93

 

rat tear: aafrasata asa aTTaserT—

& qa 24
qe qow ¥R
RY RYo qRX

awry —qatfaiganinanao” [fglfreneaataes aenearaa
Vig) der gata aultrargastaead sferaeaqt 1 asa
wafnd say 2833. vactanaart afr at TAHT HTT: 29,
PUTATTTIT gg FS SEESE

wa seat saree saHaEweE: Hulsey —

“ORES YoXYOs
WURSRSR ASSoR

5000000 qRYooo

eqreqt—1.  E. om. gaeqF: to RRXeoo, below, last line.
2, A. C.D. FA: 3. A.D. wet
4, A.B. sfaaraer

--- Page 184 ---
wie: 5 ] aHTaaqyT wat &3
[ waaraagissaa |

fel ga-faos lagers aeqasarraa-

ofearararatarg'—
HATA We TATd ATTA F |
fava st Panamay ic il

ararat fararet eeafafa afar | arare: aot aaee
ararmaga | IT? aed ta ore qatraq 1) sary qaet
ead: | aalabreaetr: | wat: ? grea aed ®? gar
AeA TTeT | CART TA: ATT:, ESTA: A eaeTAsa  F aft gery
TAR wet The azaTT: | eral AM wea AOAT:, AoraTT
Wparerey aay | feat: tact qaeay | aad faeare fa
setter “set araeed” | aezteatt, 3.3. 33] sft af ats ag
ag: | we raed caTHsT:,” Fa fasta aHrareatsal fafeacact
faeaz.’ eft) facrcaata: faeacate:, qaarate gad: fers
arene frereatrre, ferent quit mer a freaeatredgr: |
aw: ? ora: | afer faereteige art dant daq 1 feat
araqyT: aaa: tana aad aranafestarfafea aa
ara afrarirat sraafrrery 1 gar surfers
ware BUTTARATTTTATAT | Gada’ feanfrrmeqsraa-
we saftey | aeTATTAa TAIT aaHAAIAAAT AT
aaeay aay aris dormeadatia sarfr aati sutaaraarfearra
agriaceraits | Ay TTAMATAETAMTATAT ETCH EAT |

SqeTH:—

qferagds cara aad acarfe da eorfit
way amtemet dnd st ward

Gay— 1. Mss. t@. But the commentary uses the word ar
everywhere.

ereM—1. DD. afearararg

2. Mss. corrupt: A.D, MaATTIRASE: 5 B.C. aN TaTTT RET:
E, wamaqeqaarss:

3. B, gaure 4, A, B.C, weaafy aret

--- Page 185 ---
ae , aafwarar’ { aferee

aa: — ¥

afeme: ov

4
aurg — yayfataread ast [x] i war aaa TTF
afmeararaara alas: FA AR | MANATAAT TH TATA: | TT TT
qa waa afore wa vo, qge. oedtatit: qs. waa ArT
eam 29 faeareatard: ¢. aaararet afta: away qon |
JaaTH:-—

fanfaterafaer veferta da atfaar ageat
matetgarat afrt acne earaey 2 i

Fae, ~
afeea: 94 Ve q

34

TITAS TART 2X  AAHAT 9Ro |
x 3
x

a

TeITH—
fanq cafast qfa: acaameafa atfaaraa’ t
afer aa‘ feaq card caTase aH eqarT Hh 3

wreati—1. E. om. ara: to HUTA 2.0 Cy taqraarcatat
3. C, aitfrareaer 4. A.B.C.E, aea

--- Page 186 ---
satm: c ] CHAU ATAT aX

aa: —
qv
qe vw
afera: 96
a3
. . x g
meq farragerey aay’ wed eqqTaaa q I
aIaATAT Foy | fo Yo

a

fayragraaay Bamravafzad, 7 ara, galaearaa-
araneq | aeaale a— aaa fageaged aa a aaranfiraedd:
aalaTq | TT

qsagiagea ga aftrdgarrarerareray |
wot atenfaal! agieafeenfedt ere: WX

wey araaaraat at taal | wa a agafeeay aeq araatarast
wT qeaasett | aa aframrearatiefacefarragerdiacarer
area? aeate = fara |

ay qarframearataiaeernagesaad a= agiofeers
aaa wahreetsragaia mart [ata] 1. gaiaraaraaer
fay? set— faumday noaavatiea [at], + araae a
eft" aa safendisaaaat waft ger se st tarTaae 4
ward fargy 1 wary? gaiofeceninaata |

 

aremt—1.  C. ar 2. DE, agzaeiaer
3. E, wasfager qa 4. A.B. C. a2 for faat
5. B.C, agar 6. Mss, gatataaraqey
7. E. om. efa

8. B. hapl. om. : arqaye a [ereat to aa arqarae 7]
next page, line 5,

--- Page 187 ---
ts) afore - T afore
SqeTH:—
araral gtan saat qiataratanta: 1
qd asa aareard sel aera atfaat 0
an asa-fafaraa dgaafa gam gue |
at AeA a Mafra Acad: UX
rata. —

ZS

VY
43 4%
aftaa: qo (
qe

N 2 & a . ~
aed arqaae 2 31 aanaT gee | Canteacrafaay
aay HATATA ara TS

[ aanet sceaaETIsa |

TAAAT BATATHTMT AAS —

¥

aaat Aart TAET UT HA ATTA: |

adai dat wa Prescerq | Ha? seer ae 1 ‘'-aTSa
gest, sade ord arafaedft 1 wea Tal: Tererataat;
qredat: sat: ? geat— qredar iw: Gaza: oreaararsaeate
geqa— afe adda sareanrd, [ear oretar-asareara:] aa
vq wala, MATT TATNAS aTaT | GA aera | ATT Tata
gerafrarieaiaaaqeaat we Tat: qredateeara:, faearcraray-
cara af aaa 1 arearalt grat aat;” efet vata?

 

saren—1. A.B, wurde 2, B.C, vata;

--- Page 188 ---
wie 8] Sage merece as

wy waysTeT + Rrowianfrcarteaeaieeaia atarear ferred,
aca aaatarnti wacarasa gan fara qatfafeaqarfaer-
AATSA | AATHH | WeaAITHT Ge Baas | afatearai ataat
mar wet, aes afrafadt aeafegqerganaq:’ qayi
aan BaAaTagTaaa| Teaser | vat A
RUE KegTATaA J faiag |
MAAK a Sa GAAS AEATT |

aafafearat dart warraaaaaesaraaraT ata

Wa HyAsdT AAT Haase wesqHw waar? WA
TATHCTS TETY, T eet Hara wate ? we HaTATATY, we
merry ? ay ate: | meee THTATATS ATH FSH | Tera —
Marersy Heal: wea | areaeT ale saa, sreqEe a1"
| wsereatat, 9.9.22, Tasarareay | wafmarft 1 aaraT—

MATATTATABA TIT STITT H:—

wel asa a cefeataeard getacritet aa |
afeagion arat afte fraamarat gu 9

FaTT:—

; |
a OR .

afer: 15 .

Uselah Tay ; HSAAT | ait: TeaAAATT:, BTATTAA
qa earcaara Go, @¥o |

saren—I1, B. caster: 2, DB. aut
3. C. adds fe before qread 4. B. waaay; C. aaa:

--- Page 189 ---
&s arforerar’a [ sferete

qagatrerenatanerat eTHU TART | TTAT—
faagisaart geerfa serfs arf afore |
aat seagate wa Re Rafe TAIT RI

geq anerfatdaca qageeta wt TaeaaeTy [ef]
rata: —

afzera: 48

9
user TEM aaTAgeaaa STATA —

afer: 20 | |

BA e
[ faasenaacan: arava: ] awa: & [qed faeare:

faa ‘2 | mat qredaieeara: afa? ae: **3 gafafaar
wal * at

vata [felates faairg a1 fasareren® ara: —

afetra: 29

 

WEATHAATAR HATA: 72, Fad faeATe: w |

 

eqreqt——1. EE. 3a 2. The mss. read sata
3. E, om. efa to da aqzailft: s¥, below p. 69, line 8.
4. A.C. om. fg and read fas¥a, faaitg; B, om. f%
5. Mss. corrupt : fawatacarq

--- Page 190 ---
gare: & ] Rearwet wexrarew4res as

afer: 22 | .

42
meaify qaaaa frearcraraat: eat: HAA sy |
TAA MATATAAAMAAAHATAM TT HAF | TATSAT: THA-
facarees gramraraednen, fedtacarfs aafaeareea slemrarreare-
aapaaaniser HAT. agar, qeafaeareea sremrarTeaney
fadtaeartt aafacarcer sremraraea Fate: —

% g

gremqsanea Ge faearerararsara sat go, BeaTEAaTfeay
faqneafasta oft 30, talfacarzletemraraea® Het qos, AeATA-
warfenraqufacciafa yw ; waaternaatate, Ft aT: oe |
wt fganfaanfarnageicate set seared | add
fasacared facare:, theqdarara:, TearraTaTgTsaay | aaa fea
THlas wat cafsaseyery | TAAI—
waren qe sfaqaryead TAT A Ay |

aan fanfas: wee ferg waa TTT Wz

qT: —

afeera: ev

 

 

sareat—1, A. glawaetanadater ; B.C. ganteatanardaacr
2. Mss, araearer
3. E. om. "qa: to FTTH, next page, line 1.

--- Page 191 ---
ge erfererara

[ "fwrers

SUA ‘even Tee Get TeeaTa!’ ef Pret: sedate:
Ro, Wea qo. [ maT: 20]. wa amafanfah et |
TARA: AFGATT [Roo] |

see H:—

aTeTSSt TAA’ sqray at oreetery sede |
feaaea wet ated Wrarafadfeaaentea® un ¥

eq —

afer: 2y

g

 

HUA— FIA: SATA: 4, WAT a. Tafatarer 2° FATY Yo
mearady x. Ua ‘TaTET Tied Get TeeATA.’ Eft ATA GA so |

SHANH —

faeare: osaledt aatat gesned Waar |

afcaadaned feaerard fafrter vy ul

art: —

g
afzta: 2¢

sqreat—1. B. qetserta Ya
3.
4.

2. C, wmareara: aa HTT
E, om. *4Ta:, the figure and the word #t7q

A. B.C. om. ‘2’; E faa for ‘2’,

5, C.F

--- Page 192 ---
wire: % | sqrateigrarat 4

HUTA— FSITAATT: Vv. THT 92. caferaradgy ga
fama 30 |

ud aaeay itgaafectsrar He freee |
[ eararigeasat ]
ang o fasHenesgeasarraa sae
qa: warasar Aepearia at gear ie il

afta: aferret gafafe cater? 1 aer ofa: wearer ar
sat at fasaearda geat | ofa: ssait ufnaay 1 ufaga-
aalaatfedt at sat ar oft: wearer sar) aeat wef uaa
eaTesaT | Vaea ad Bas ofaradiafate 1 aferss farFarqaen-
farrtegraneriaies Sas aq seurrsqrar ae aerTAT
aarsasrat fasta adsanteafa® aeafe 1 vata TSATSAT
sfarefara gata ve aacafsdarfs sega safearhr
wa facrentdareta 1 vg ar aq:atarfir fasatanisaratt | ud a
gsfadaq | said aeq Gearrsaeiter ‘aaqaafefrtd
farara’ [ahtto, 99] seaeat arfearat aera ei

[ aa eneqfefaaracg: |

aera TTT aA TATE

aaaa qarege greece acareny |
wyIaTAHeTeqaca Taree: Ugo I
aafaefize agefeea tf aq? waq i aerfirifinay
weegna caged wala — geet warts afargeefifa | agarfir s
wafer: | wagamtwa gaa | aged a faeneaey” agaaT
fasatea: | azar aqterasetl facaeaisqagacaMn at ayaea-
careat—1, E. adds aad 2. 3B. vata:
3. C, SATA
4. A. B.C, aedgareafefaa 1 5. A.BLC.D. om. ar
6. Mss. sfvqutecter 7. B. adds here a;

--- Page 193 ---
92 afar [ afer

fASREM: | Ter agagafaomeMer! | A TRoooe | NEA: fAFE: |
seared: ? gener afemigey | wet faaraa qenearaet eft, 7 IA
aafagifemearaer:; aTaat saaheneray qenearagricaategeat |
ag atg:, aetenrafaay | adareey Feaafassd Cagreataat faarg-
gfaafa: [ afe aetercrerry |” | aecternht, feaqag &, TWIST
arsay | eft 1 wemreqenearaed ft careateaTe: | AMAT
sraeaqaeaa acatcatrarteetaa 1 a a aeataetasatteaa” |
ate feachreary i ate earaarfearaat: sqraertearary Tsar]
afefr:, a afeaqt qrrat sare ate, ca QeaTeeT afa
sarafaan | saraeataicfs: weATgsaa, 7 TA: epeatefirtaiaad ?
ua Had— a soa vat atfer aa gencfcfradiadt 1 AF
aranfea—

fardvamazayrecit aged tfczat gifz |
[ facarnatcrqracht aaer fee wate 1

sfa 1 warfa Faq cara: adtaafa: | wofaoarsem? earag:
afchrfefa ar aad cerattia THAT wafasnenetaer aiefaeer
aug ef aaq, aatearfrararmeare Fetal cafafaea-
wamaaageaania anata afseneagiehrasesat: a
amar aadtit Baehe aera |

gasq— Fada sare apart, THATATITTIAT |
aat aaTaA aaaaner stator ait watia aatsaaratit
aq qaaanageatit water |

qemaaT AAA SME: —

anfacarada gatacar ge*eqrama |
sta ae, afarmacateta ¢ BYSATTTST

eqtegt—1. E. adds here Aart: 2. E. adds #fa
3. C. afa for afe 4, A.B. fafsaq
5. A.B. C.D. hapl.om.:  [aa‘** wea) ofrarfcs
6. B. aa

--- Page 194 ---
sete: qo | sataate farsa: 93

qat Hararararaatas ga TAT —
aren faesed omen aye gata
asafiaea g aa aa’ aagam” u

[ aamigtt facseraraneé ast gaiq |
agifraes yo yeti at sitar adaarmy i |

‘aT ata ara —

afta: XW

 

aTaanaaay ya AAT —
egragm star! afracin® wag fanfors vay |
agg aferaed ud stor g ottea’
[ qqaqan sitar arachnids fare GerA |
agecésery ata care go mae |
WATT WAT TATVAT: AAT Fo 83, Ho 8s, wa Pawy
ecfasarirarara satared | ato serea ae

 

saTem—1. C. sftaraaaigra ; BE. oasaetara
2. A. D.E. sar; C. tar

3. B.C. om. aa: 4. A.C. DLE. sftat
5. C. caazeit 6. B, wHeaH

7. E. warta

8. A. B.C. hapl om. satcaet | weit ; D. BE, satcyea

Write We Yo

--- Page 195 ---
 

wy

aTferarata [ afore
alafg! a zeato? ¢ qraaracadteaaa’ |
aagoanfd atfraadt g oeteaa’

[| aqaat a ante fe qeaare: anced 7 |
aradareanind aefraard g aTacaq ue |

TATHAT Ast Fo Zoe | afaotacagas aaa Tet
wo 4&0, Fo 4071 [AAAI Fo] g¥o | AAPA: GA! TATA:
Ho 42qo® | HEAATAATATLARABA FLA: zou? | ayaa
GAAATUAET F HTT RAAT AATAATA UIANTATAT |

qesrtaaait a amacotattiasfaaratenettaT Fat AT
(aafa | var] qsorraa” qaaratey” —

sarmanciigha: ear [erage weoaeat: |* |

[ watean:— fersarnfasnee fazaara tt |

sang fardaa” gata sar asa" faerfa:” [Qo] 1
(aaat saan | qeartarq—sarara: [*s=] x, meray] ate &,
FAY AR, TMALIM: BRo, TAT BLA: SY | VaHeToATAT-

 

eqreat—1.
3.

14.
15,

‘16.
17,

D. E. weafg 2. A.C. wah; BE, TeTHT
A.C, D. e474 4. B. Wg .

C. aay 6. B. om. Fe &e; A.C. om. Fo
A, om. Fo &o, Fe ho

A, B,C, 88 foo 9. A.B.C, {22°80 ; DE, §2a¥
E, aaca:

Mss. actually read : weqtaT aat 7 gearaam (A aa in C.D.)
A. D.E. om. a4

Mss. read only #at safq for the bracketted portion,
’ which latter has strayed below.

Mss. read ae

After faafa:, the mss, adds faq SIASTM PWIA,
vide fn. 13 above.

Mss. actually read tat sara:

A. B.C, om. 4

--- Page 196 ---
vette: 4° J sureaafefitarara: oY

waearfe wafs, ose Het sfewaaafafe, sataq area |
sara sara: qseq afaaery | atafeartarracacagenatieai
sata? qsanetianraarctaamarsea §«oafaarhanatgaat anise”
RTH |
HATTER: —
qetaafafacnraats THAaTTTET |

qantas Sal eT qo l Gaede eanear aafe: Hay
Rol SAAT: AF Yoo |

waren era rarreeaT eT aT a | TAT a? SIT
wa areca aay |

aaa Feral UM TEATSRAG, T TACIT AAAI; APTA
walag:, Tae arefsaea aerafaard gad) geteararter
aay | waa ayagafacarafheacaratesaa | aT aarrafad-
fasprarfrart aweqrertat | waar aeaa— yerafefafasnear iret
narfasmenTg sag aerefagaag a afar: aeqrearzar-
fafa, vat a ‘afa’ arfag safaaaa sored sd, aafaea
aa: Tar:

qfeore: Thfa:, ad aa, aaer ofeorg: qaafene:, aT
afcfafecad: i maa fasaee rate ofefardtaa,* aft a faa
fasara git tay ? aaeq facrereqat ofefefearaenraca
fart, aaex ofeaa fasaea gearafea: feaifafa 1
"SqeTH —
feaqcecatetait earatat arf anafmanfa
yma at fanng afrragnte uu

 

sareat—1. Mss. actually read ataat in place of Samar
2, For sata: mss. read sata:
B, om. @ 4. A. B.C, qerary
A. B,C. aa a4 ; D. qata
B. hapl. om. & [afeat a fata]
E. om. [314 to #4], following, p, 77, line 2.

NDA YY w&

--- Page 197 ---
[ nfaeo

a& afer

BACT FATT:

Sioon

 

afwre: 3s
weatfa aarft sare — qR 4 RX
q99 Rae FRRS8 53

GRR RRR AVRO ERY

afeat fata faspearaaa seeeai:—
AaATUATIATTACSTS: TAMARA |
aaraqrara a % eqararaey fama niu

rate — BRAS
ie RIYG00
RX
edt AYTHAT SATAT Yoko | Roy
ERM
4308

 

saTeat—-1. Mss, hapl. om, the little circle of the negative sign.

--- Page 198 ---
rete: 94 J Resfafaat assay 9

[ sasfafant saissrata |
lag SaTaaaTaRTE—
anaaaifand Brad fesewsess |
anaes & feneared aaah i ee lt

anqd afefiea aaca acata anwarctefa:, Ter oe
amquafefirate: 1 ama arent aanaer geet seater |
ararinmete gaia frag safee: 1 a qefefe searsenrfatar-
meas | area —aresgqeasarhaara geefata semeastishe ararcitfer
FAT BIOSAeASAT emeaaT | aa gy TH— fest aresqersafe |
ufe amresqeasal A TAIT AMIATAAAT eTACATAAATAITSeT A
wae | Fargdtas afraq sae: aisedifa Aarearaatye: aarar-
waaraafaesd 1 a ae caer: Thea: Toa: | ATSSGeASATSATAT-
aaa TT —

aeafea:! mawnt eqerfer ret mereeetery |

aft amadion ofefir: cagariefr:, anaacfes: ma: araaa ects
gia: of aaqerafefeerd Rarer | sarfrantata aaa, | sarkrarira
anqgarial auewa fayweagdaes arg’ aaaroeatatie’
fasqera,? a faanarasaratie’ 1 aif fafaserta ofeperd,
fraguedisugifanfeearata faqnacfr 1 ‘g’-meara feagsrs-
seemgrenagemaa 7 | fawerd faqaeagiad’ | TeHIT
farsreagiarea® aasaratia frsrard

ameat—1. A. D.E. om. Wa

B, hapl. om. aaqugfefaqa:

B, qeasaieiccarardergatar = 4. Mss. ofa fa:

D. E. a: 6. B. at; E. a4
B. E. om. amar ; C. anarqaife

E. om. the word fasqarre

ee rw YP

E, om. 4 fagaarasaratft
10. A.B, faysetaqeqrert
11, E. hapl. om. aTypaes

--- Page 199 ---
ee aforerat? [ aferero

ay gatasarata’ fart a vasirataqeaa eft sera—
meq eared aT aT ar wafe ageareard fre 1 wazaT
faspeargy va saraifa fastaea  faonraratacacarca faoareret-
afafees adet cad | carat favreard afa soratfr fered |
fraie fe fasaeare aad sar aeafird, areaae 1 wag? aeaTgaTt
‘afta: vearmsat fasneuretg ar gear’ [afoo, | sfa |
area safteais, ararsaraifa |

meat afarat «6 sateafaaegarata = sfasiferararan,
[ww] g + sfacfeaq, staracsfaaeara awTeT | TaaT
saterat seat aad sanfasa, Saw a careatantafafe | a |
sfarfeary |

ay feat anquafefame va sarfaatita faad, 4 GA:
anqatithasgad ? te ae: araaaefagerarrata sat UAT: |
ua ad aquing 1 aearatefasrararrey geacata aasi ofefa-
qrarat saratie® qeatfa waedifa ofefarresara gata ofaorfeaha
sqagiafagaay |

SqeaT: —
aqzganagamaage fasneard feacarnfa sataifa
‘erage arearhs frsqraea | faoweardA 3¥3c |

FU TaWassgeasentaAgeI | BHAT
wsaaifaer’ ag gramat faye 1 FT a grawearat waa efa
atmos: | aa gremat faved qvea qa ufagarranifzat
afamiatt sarsrt wai’ gate 1 wt oferty vata

aqreai—1. DE. fasnryegre 2. B. om. aerar

3. E. hapl. om. : savatfa [ acarfr ++ saraifit |] crea,
four lines below.

D. gap for waadarsarfa fasta
F. om, facsrardy 3¥35 1 HUTA
B.C. E. qaufaer 7. Cy tat

~ nw -

B.C. hanl om - wmafan [+++ ania] n 7a fine 1

--- Page 200 ---
zene: 49] geafafirar sassatae BR

afamiacamae oF gqaiguaat sai? gate 1 gate 4
qaimefamatica ata a ufaargeesraranfgest Far: Batt
aar east! for | eetearfa

aat 4 oftalaoged ata when facfraatanraaa fae |
vanrtatat aa ad sacfaatera |

qi: 38

 

warey aatatdgeat AGT Brssrat [gor |sary aa
faRTeosaT | AT A 4048 | TTT AAT, Sara Hot: eta, asrrepotaaf-
faaeg yanaaran: | Fa ACU BSA SAT | ATA Rees | WaT
aqraraiteates ae fenrcont:, wigasosqraraae Hep: | ay
featss[ qo |sar a qeso | WaAETI: HOSeAHET SAT,” 20 1 UAT
MAT, SITET HU | ATRIA TATA: | as a SATA
BST SAT | aT A 33249, fagmearzar sar area va
faqara TS saratfa eareararta |

WTATATIaS AATATeaTy alga: | TET HT eqrareat-
qHTAAA | FST vagy | We TTT Heart sar) ar |
v3 | Cater sae aqaatferotear, farrargerfratfea

sareat — J. E. hapl. om. : afarmteae ["'* afeaitac] fee, next line,

2. D. shows a small gap here. 3, Mss, 27aftadeqrfx
4. B. varatse 5. E. om, @4 to tone
6. E, meqrdiannrecseq sar 7. E, aaeq

8. A. B.C. D. waaasar

--- Page 201 ---
&o afmrarara [ afato

facaeata os ueadarsssotaife sfaarfearfs 1 afeaera
farted ufasaattacssat saeaeaTa: | aaat— qatarfafaa
aa aqrargaarcatat arsarat [gor |sat i aaa agat arearat sar,
ata q09et SF ATT, sare a:, qatar aife: |
ar wsetat BSTAT SAT, ATA Agus t Vat saTaatfemtes Me a_!-
BUST | TTAgVassaraiaas Ht AT AGAT BTSorayT
[qr ]sat, at A qeso t dea? fentsssat, [at] Fsgol UT
ast, ara aot. aaractatfaaregel wifes 1 aT cara HIST
SUT, ATF 33241 Vat saaraifemter ae fearsome: 1 weheHTss-
saratarrgea Bt: 1 aa fearsa[ qu |sar, aT a 545° | yeaear:!
HSSASEA SATS ATT eS | TTT AAT, SaTATES HI, ATH TAT
fatora yet aife: 1 arama HeSTAT SIT, AT A R¥08 |
fagnearaat sat area |

aa fenrsasat cararatg faster ae arHTsSNT: | WET
aasaratamge aor: 1 Ca (ua] arsarat amrat [qt ]sar, a
445k | AAA: TSATAT BMSSTAT Sat, AT A Yo<R 1 TTT
quar, sar at:, aoraietfarcer qe sife: 1 aT aarti
SSSTAL FAT, AT A Vors | fagaearadt sar Aeqst | wa
faqsieara saraifa

qaagmanageraaes aarardargrer caressa
at) a@ F gremrat arsarat [gor |sar, "ar a vage | aaa:
quot HISSTAT SAT, AT A Rv3Q1 Tat sararatfanter We yaqTss-
UC, UTSH ssa TAs BT | A CT TTT BISSTAT [qe ]-
SOT, AA VeRZol MAAeAM cag PISSTAT Far, ATA IRV I

sareat—1l. B.C. D. E. om. a
2. A.B. C. aragut asst

3. E. om, a4 fares[ go |sat 1 ar a s&s

4, EB. seared

5. E. wrssasat 6. E. om. @ to ¥%s%, next line.
7, B. om. ara ¥aG2 vo TaACAT: TNT Torat sar; E, om.

Ql A Xe I 8 E, wear
9, E, om, @ UF to R&Re, next line.
10. E, weard

--- Page 202 ---
tore: 44 | Sunfatirn sarsseeray 54

UIT ST, ATA HI, TarHT farger ge atfes. ar taai
HeSat FIT Al A 2qoel fayaeareat sar aegad 1 Us
aquarfaet sar: 1 fasarate aaa |

gran Ufsraguinatsssaratis = earemtatit 1 afearae
fasneata weascurTsar aeqra: | aaar— qaaarfafed aa
sarang Sema arearat [ gor [sar i dataset arearai
Tar, ATA 9O9S | UIT AA, STA HT:, ATH aay
qa atfe: | aT StSMrat FTSSTAT SAT, AT Tks | Vat saTatal-
femtaty 1 MaACSHISTT: 1 MUSTHTSSsaTaTATyA HT: |
‘aug ase arsoratt [qt |sar, are queso | aeaeat:” aaut
HSA FAT, ATA sso | UIT AAT, SIA B:, ysrrHviay
farses qa aife: | aa fant: arssrat sar, °at @ 33291 Vat
STATIS MET AT AGHWSSAT: | WLAGSHMOSsaTITATTA Hr: |
ava sant arena [qr |sar, arases | meme: HresaTsaf,
aT aT Yee | TMT AAT, Sara Hr: Toracatlaaeey qe aie: |
dq agtfamd: aresrat sar, ara Avot | wat smetaifamaad |
ae ferrsore: | Aefensasqrataage TT: 1 UT HSA:
[qor]sar, aT A v¥o | WHAT: BsET sat, AT A 22x I
UIT AAT, Aras HH: TarHtatianger got gifs: 1 Fr aatfaraa:
PSSA SAT, AT 3v39 | favscaradl sar aera 1

ay wget sresrai sat earaaifemeta tae fan:
HIST Te: | TtaafaarssaratarTe FT: a faqs: ares
[ger ]Sat, at aT xq5k | AAAI SMTAT HISSTAT SAT, AT | 20e3 |
Ua YT, aT H:, Hata ge ale: Tt aEeeai
pisotat SAT, AT A RoRS | Cat eararatiamaag | Me aaa
HT 1 Terasawa FH: | TTT aMat Hes;

 

earegt— 1, E. agit for yaaa 2, E. hapl. om. of greet
3. E. art 4. E. om, sqrardaa
5. A.B. C. hapl om, ‘tsarat sat [‘--arsarat sar, ] ar a
6. E. om. Ua to AT Youo 7. E, wear
8. B. om. at @ to HTSsatsal, third line.
9. A.B, C.E, om. at @

vido t+ 44

--- Page 203 ---
BR arforerrt [ afore.

[go]sar, aT F Ro | MAME: THAT FTsTAT SAT, ATT
qqox | UST AST, eaTared auf: yaaa fares alfe: 1 aa
watatama: BSSAT FAT, AT A BVAXE | faqaearadt sat TeTAT |

ga fenwssat cararaifastaaa | We arfamd: wrest
me) wafantrarasaatanrga ot: | Ce wa aifama: BTSSTAT
[qa |sat 1 ar a vagy | Maa WHR BSSTAT SAT,
at T 2reo | UIT AH, aA Fer, Hata Fe
sife: | da aalamrat wrsarat sar, ar ae Vusyl faqaearadt
sar aera |

gy zetat aissrat sat eararaifemata 1 ae agéarat
BISSTAL AT | ALAGeMaTsssaraiarrga wr: 1 A TT VTeATAT
arssiat [got ]sat, aT A Rove | AAACAT” TATA BSTAT SAT,
al FT 4yzo | UST AA, Sarat aot, aaciatfar ge’
-@tie) aa acaaarat arama sat, at a zone | faqAeaTedt
sat ATTT

va faamTRTTeUTTHsSsaT aaTeATAT: | ATES
sqTeqTeaT: | TRTAAAGTIAAeT saTaTayeaT ates: 1 TAT
aaa a1 TET aglaw: sresrat [qa ]sar, aT FT veRR |
HEAEAT SAUL FISSTAT Ar, AT AF 2¥Rq | Tat araratfamaagd |
He grearat Hssrat AT | weTeMaTSsaataTAS Bt: 1 a
wa glamat arcarat [qilsar, ar a Rezo l AtAeaT, TT
KISSTat SAT, ATA IRAN! VAT AA, saa Be:, Taras
fairyea qa? atfe. | AT WETAMTAT FISSTAT FAT, AT 7 3qAvo |
vat emraratfesrata | ML Goh aTsSTAT TT | MVTTHTSTATAT-
agra Bo: | Ca wa TOT FTSSTAT [qu |sat, at 7 qR¥RI
ogpTEAeaAT PISSTAT FAT, AT A Hoy 1 TIT YAM, SAA

warem—1.  B. faaser qa 2. E, om. @ to ¥43%, next line.
3. EB. wear 4. E. om. 4 U4 to 30¥e, next line.
5. EB. weate 6. B.C. EB. aa: for yarant
7 BE, fata qe 8. E. ae: | ageorapfafaarga
9, E. om. @ 0a to af FT L3¥R, same line.
10, EB, sear

--- Page 204 ---
whe: 42% J sererente worse «3

c

anh:, qoaravtadfarcer yet alfe:, ear cafaee: HSA sal, aT T
3302 | fawaearady sat aeTaa? |

my yore BIsSrat Fat sararaifamtaaa | WewseteeHcsrAt
mt. | auseremarsasaradarrya BF: 1 aT TaTseteerat aTSATAT
[got]sa, ar F aaXo | MaMa AaTAT FTSSTAT SAT, AT AT
qaqol ‘Car qa, sara aet:, “eHctatfaarege Fife: | aa
CSTAUTAL FISSTAT FAT, TA WsyS | faracaraal sat aeqaAT |

ua weasenrarsosaragianta: | aaa fart fasnrate
aesetft satatfa farsarefaaearfa® sft ee

[ sarereate essa |
safari are —
aA . e
qaarearsaraig dead feed fratarey |
. ADA
aermasataigededeatta Varfe Wl Vz ll
TUNE TAT BAITTATA | dead araahataeraTea4gay |
fay aq? afted fetter, afoed qafatfafedaaafatirar” fart
fadtaarasaniq | cerreeratt: 1 ag eft safe: sararasaratg
feftaarasadga aracaed: sfopead, sara ad! sare, Tat a
assarg® az sansardq'’: gaa saat arat sara FqasaT,
yoNsaT salad oT seasaed, wansardeaie: TaASTTEteT:,
sarmsmatrer “sqarsardt ant Eat Asa Tat SAT: TSM:,

 

wareay—1. D. ysratfe for asneef ; EB. agearagtafatreqe

2. D, ered 3, E. aad for werecraerarsasarat
4. E, om. @ to at J As Qe, next line.

5. EB, ead 6. E. om, Gat to #t:

7. C, aati and D. agaragfa for yaractat

8. E. frenfaaeatia

9. E. gatareatfatga 10. E. famar

li, Mss. sate for t4q «12. Mss. sar are
13. Mss. wad @ aeatqsard 14. Mss, saaarqsard
15. B. om. 34% to & 4, next line,

--- Page 205 ---
av -—— epferererti | [ afer

ae gyAsaaiMies TeMATaTTi Mea: | dette heh
framed adage vate safe dene 1 mee cigarit, Aerie
getarfesarstit vatec |

aarar— say arasardfad Farha Freq 2241 feet
aTTsTTABayY Wy | TeMAaTISaTaeaTTT | fataarasareater
seNasae sea vvs | we TTAATTSITdT Cat [za]
weanaiaar 2 et Taeat gia a [wad] serarsaret
[adtasare] waft) aee Re) aarrt walt: e069 1 wet
yaaa MTA Sif wafer 1s: GaetseT
fafred cra sare aqisared® waft 1 get 298" 1 agate
Taaat FANT: c Go! | wea? seAaTaT aTTeed'* aeaThe waif
matfarat 1 a: qara qefredt sad Aras TSA saTes water |
TT 29) wat: Harfer srreararée

Be FT STRATA Net sgTEITAT | TSAI ATT AT-
seareaT aareart ee) BATRA” ? aa TTT TTITT-
Tea ATATATTSAATT AT HAA TATTEAA | Marea eTeeTS AT
afer | waq"? gafatfafea"aernfafear fratareat crated
arasaratearfre ai fama 1 afera® fagqaraacara aot area

arfea | sqaTFaTTAT F [7] pagans |

 

emeat—1. E, |, Baraka 2. KE. adds avatferded

3. D. sard farerizadted 4. A.C. aa

5, E. sawarsatda get qatar + Te

6, E, wit gt wee

7. EB, aveara® arqearet setearesard ‘yafa 1 asa oferta
dea | sant datredaifeder: | AEAIT TAM AISA TAT
saifama fer wars weet 1, a:

8. B.C. om. FF 9. BD. E. sat arsed

10. E. afaafarraderq for 2t&

Il. E. @eepseteq: for c&o

12, FE, mente for mea 13, E. om, werd

14. E. qaaeter 15. DB. aaa

16. FE, afagfraradery for 224 17. A. B.D. EB. saaradaay

18. A.D. E. ga: for 1H 19. B.C. gateratfifga

20. E. om. #4 21, E, qeare

--- Page 206 ---
wie: 42 J qenfefafa: ey

~

waearge araisay gan | ae gafear sar: gee ge
fasrara 2? oafearfawareata 1 Cassatt: «| RTeofetss-
faarsarfasaratfas sfrarfaft 1 aaraatafater gar TaR
sar wardtfa aafuastste a aratfa, fe ga: atacae: | rat a
aeagfantarat seat | aaet—

~~
RAW, WSS, HOI, FSO, 119K, TRVYR, VARX9, 1918,
1SYo5 VORB, VRE, VHFY, PUSH, VERS VSAS» RYVGs FOS,
3UGG, FALE, FIVT FROR, FOR, FYI BERS |

MATT ASAT: HAT TTR TTR FAT: —

BRA, BWW, BRR VIB RVR RV 95 VOR, ISR, 184
GER WO, WEW, WLS, VER V8 VIS, 1% Rr 8, FX 44,
89, XX, 0 I

TAT CACHAN TITAS HASAT: 11-22 UN
[ aarfafafa: ]
‘quifafate feenraxestartate—
qe aay ard frat a sadist a BaieaTy |
aa FAA ATG THAT I 23 Il

ad aad wt areqe | want weer: Thepad | aA
aera anqd aa sferasania® ofetad’ | faye aqid se
aoa faust ad agus waa aufeat saver | faye araq
aATaTATaAY Ga Tat Vat Fata "aT a—

 

afta: 30

Walayeageyaa HHEPT AIATTAA | Caearagqes-
ProareaICTaATACaT: |

 

saTeq7—1. A.C. D. E. atatata 2. A.B. C. ota. aq

3. E. om. aat to THATAT:, line 13 below.

4. Mss. watfese for terfefafa 5. A.D. E. 91%

6. C. ofetet 7. E. a€a0 for at 4 at
8, EB. fataaaz

--- Page 207 ---
wt

aafererert
afeera: a4 (h

ae qaeaany fra fected rat frac frre tat
aaig | fadtaratstr ata 1 ca & soba 1 reat wotgqareat rarfire
faqay—

afctre: 3° Ay

wae eczagear [aot last gat feet varetg | ae GaA—

[ stuns

afetre: 38

fedta tamerafracaters fata sands i car a whe |

~

Ram: areata afearta, ageaeta Frege |

wrear—1. A.B. C.D. Patra 2. BE. ged at

--- Page 208 ---
vite: WJ

afeta: 9X

 

area Wa AAA ATE AT We | TIaT—wWpEga-
adtmaraaaat faarssiafe fata soaeet fata ser: afrd Raia,
qe aganaeerat area aale | TTATREH: aARATE Tirade
aq sara at a: AAT, Ta TENT FT VeaAT afassd afar,
wa aramed agerafata | aa aed meade) ome otafaed
q seasae: aisaaeahta atedat | Hedwemeq aT aiser-s eer:
qaracaqaranag | Taran Terorararara® gaps i 23 i

[ raaefacmeatia |
cago facarareataarstae —
TEh TMI Hrnaiiq age Feat |
wary age feared crag | ee i

[ welcarscarfatara |

WA WER ATATATATA aTagea TAIT | RFaq TATA!
amreyarsaqaaat agen, weafaart eqfs:, sofefaat’
marare eft | qencatfemees® qensaar aleat gamed qaeT-
marrage garqeafefe asa a | Yarmteqaacaaey farar-
aad eYydT ZAKS | aaMTaTETaT TATA: | TIGeaTHia-
TMA AeaTaATIT ATT TATEATAT |

wt ME — aemagieantaravarrraeraren esas
ariemadtscntent fanenfafatetes t waraht gsad,’ fag agree
asta faferranaqurtaretiadnt gtaaaats ereqeriaa:
sig? safeq arate, aarft sfaeri® qaeafrqaearrary

 

wweam—1. A.B. C.D. om. WF: 2. B.C. wHeqareay
3. B.C. qexernraraaet 4. E. faaaa
5. B.C. hapl. om: B. om. aa to gafeBrart; C. om,
safe: sofefrat

6. A.B.D. fawguer; C.feguer 7. A.B. C.D. fafagqsaa
8. B.C. fafewg 9. D, sefteret

--- Page 209 ---
Be afrern’ { afte

ga: gt: TEartaarard aiery 1 gar aTfegqerquearaarsitec-
smatirarean caifafa air, teaenrenfeearsaisanit TER: |
madd asa TERT: TAFT: |

aviadtar, tqraatafafassrafasat® earactater 1 Tereat—
saeaarena agit Ufafeanatsa safest qareTaT-
auageage aterearay areqaraey seed: 1 fafaragfaat
gqqadea agfteta: arafare 1 wealteaqacafae-
aamaafeafacts garqdaa: weqaesqaaad = TaRaT |
TAA —MSHARS TAH frvae fara agaraha weHyereTH ayes
fama aanaad® aad seriterned a Fa" Haig) wagaaqe-
qeaye,” aa: gaehs wheaa® Alea qaraAergarsat Aceagearal
aqeaaarnaay | ag atarfe aetseaa, aafee Teqeaaet
gamer faqaadearsaarned ster sa a faatssfagorara
gfat ag ate: wegrecte ek fasmeuratiaarar eager wars”
qequatfadt atét arat” ar fara 1 aarssfeagraerthart 7
‘wfaeadtft 1 saat staearaaraaqan gafaaedda faafoag-
fearaa aeagfearay | aeareqefaarricftents meter rare waft
gaa’ | aera fe cremate ear | TEATAAETATT, WER:
siamreqa eft asfasryigeitead | sqamacaresfarratasara, |
araaaaa® ga: yeast walt TaTATAg aTZAT qa WWead, Aaa Tea
feat wafa ataararareqeraaar: gear. qafeaan wafer 1 Tey
gaqedrararan: Bis geatalea: AETTATT |

| aegoamaaaary |

gard waTTyazeara: | Saag: —adgedt sree fawaa-
were sfa. ay faaa: 1 “faradtezazestsfsaatarae: aatee-

wreqt— 1. DE. aeAd

2, B. afafa : fassrafagady ; C. afaed fassrafasrad (wr.)
3, A,B. C.D. om. Wa 4. D.E. meafaaear
5. D.E. aaa 6. Ct

7. CC, 2@ 8 A. HET

9, BC. D.E. 34 10, B. atTaTarar
ll. C. areat 12, B. C.om. #44

13. A, araratd; D, E, arqarag 14. B.C. C. om, gaat:
15. C. frwy

--- Page 210 ---
eave: 4% | regrerafae ate &&

qserrrfaara ead: | Tae HAG, aa aareqafaart
Seg frat a atraaesatag |

{ scites-earear |

mer: samat, TEifeat safSaasvameT sHTTgTAfTaAT-
marsfataaifacgaray | afe weifrsata SAT cardal wy
aifadiaarcgeaara afaaasarr ca sfafa: i warrer ait:
TAMA; TL TATA | Sai, RATA aT: Barawt:, FT BlaT-
ator | aga een, Btw: | weer aia, Ter AAAI waa
qa ad, Aq eqqufacwemed vais’ i fe aga aeae fearsHrare-
fageaa ? aeqageta shetarfataaea aaea afesararedy |
qed ata dearfaag: caqufaaemed wafa ate ate.) afe
aaaeeatiang, caqafacpearey waa, fe afegeay’ ? wa qa:
TSHIAIAGaaiage eafaonenrad fafaseta sepa, aar-
agent eaaefaeae ares TEI Aaa’ VAsSat | TAT aw AteraiNre
at Madttiad | aa a caqafasaraniver aufrasfseraq—
qaea eqaafasneatdieg ud? wegeat gar’ TiafasHeatey
H ala wegen wert 1 aaa fagala waaragrersa qeqeag |

SIS: —
qsaraniagat grat geet fared aarat q 1
fagarred aa uyictenfanered 71

FATT — WER: 92, GAT YX; WEF 42, BMT 3, WEE: V2,
erat 3

FUTA—NEHSHATAMN V¥. Ws, THA FRR | WET Tat
eaaqaasnraay | TSAT 3 | War ataeg cata: —

=aTeaI—1. EF, qarfq

2. A.B.C. hapl. om. : wafa 1[-* aafa 1] Fa, two lines below.
3. Mss. afesrary 4. B.C. E. ame
5. E. om. 4ary 6. C. om. w

7. B. om. @at

Hio Ae 42

--- Page 211 ---
Se afore { _afrae

afzea: 3% R, 43

4
eaqafacneniad ATH BATATATReT ASHACATITT FAT |
agargaren yar site fara meguraaiaad fraeaat qatar |
HATSATSSAAT AT fTHEATTAT—9 3 1M BKRS | ASTAASAT ERX \
TOT AST, SATE HOH:, ToT faMTTAT AT: VO | au
farmatfe 93.192 1 8¥85 | aeTAAATAT: RY0% | gas aa-
faire: | auifah arat gases eaqufsonraraes Sage
FAT MEHFCAMSAAET ETSI dtasararder ay asraarrarfafe |
gaat sfemraas, Heals Brzal A qataas caqc fronearereat as
fafa.) Paeq orrat sfesraay WE_AT alitata Te_TATATAT |
AMAVATHAA FAMAT TTT | ASAT qatar AISA
gaaatfate Brrardat |
ayarefs caacifasrera qx 1 oF | aufahtarasara-
APA 20%, BHO; AER BROT
FIAT —
GSATMSYATSI: TAT FAT TETTA GAT |
fagafzanemts areatsasatsaaeaat ala UR
sare HSH: YY, BAT § 1 AUT eaqcifasearay } 1 HAA
cara er fasme aaa Tar aasaTaa Ea A 432% 390% I
Tee: —
FAMCTATAM SY: TSM TE AATS|TASACAT |
memtknagratsat fanangaeadt red: U2
FATA: — NSH: Fo, BAT YR | gina caaetfacHraret 3¥ |
ast TAATAT RIS WU VEU

[ sftasorarnd J
qarasaraTH Ase —
qegae Tesemiiat TEFATAAA ET |
qeasy AT STAT SAT THN AZATHS lt Ve Ul

--- Page 212 ---
gate: 1% ] ‘sihewgrared a4
TSR TET aT MERIT fF afzertg — veqaonfeeey
AAMT TATA SHIA, waa TEA AAs TT
TSEHTALAT TEISHINA | agnqanfanga Sr: TANT SOTA
at faa? a MSHA: Ia Ta ATT | Tee AT BAT uyl-
EaEAT ERAT THAT WHTAMTT AT BAT APA |
FIAT; —
afeendiagara giatagfegarasteat & |
famemifgncat feaner wetda eon qn

Fata: —

wR
afta: 30

Er---5e-- -->

MSRITATL so, UTPGEFIT Ko; FAT wR, WEF:
q2, vada: go, (HAT gt WERT TE_astfsay’ Tear
Bray qe I

fgdtatgeraneataS—

afeta: 35

EN

q~- 20--?
wren—l. B. hapl. om. wétiteata ['wdtaesraeq], same line.
2. B,C, om, a
B. hapl. om. fatra: [***faats:], same line.

E. om, weqyt weRysfars 5. D, E, weaserat
A. B.C. waa

a FY

--- Page 213 ---
RR afore’ [_ afer

qdawita weet Bat I wand aufray wrq ?
qegaisfrarar safest afe MEHTA UTATATT Bla THAT
aa MEHAT Ba Bar eeqT

fardanto sata: —

Blat vrs gear gracacafeoaer eae |

qe fieaet agtatanney cat area 8

aT

afewe: 3¢ w2

 

HUTA— NEFMAPALTTAAT Go GAT AST, TT “WTTTTET
wafer goa’ [aftae, 35] (eit Brat qe Thar GTAT <0 ;
vata ‘TERT wegyafaaey waft wears aretfate
qrarer ame [Tht 35] efrt wERAT qR Za MEHTA AIT
AsIT | TST so? |

sqeTT:—

‘afsendtaqena csanigacdieaa: weg: |
ara sera Tefeaateneafenfenary ato: 1 yu

aatemI—l. B. qaacita

A. B,C. Aatrruraesrar 3. om. 3a

tN

E. om. mart weTaT Eft
E. om. a7 to TAIMAT 2, below, next page, line 6.
Mss. aan for afse

a ak

--- Page 214 ---
were: 98 ] megemargdy delsararsa reat 83

art. —

afrare: Yo

42

€— - - Yo =-- 940

SUIT ‘TSHTIT HA at graraaar qa wafer’ [ThirTo,
qa] sft aesarraeta maquarfaaegzaearar aifedtaatfe |
MEGTTATL Yo, BAT Yo, THA Fo, UASFEFTT Oo, FAT-
HA TATA OQ UW BRU

[ nggesragaa ahesrncareay |
afratadisararaaraay. TeRSaaTsTATTTATS —
aramgicd sentra art ay |
MERI Ht ar Hraragat yst wala | 2g Al

gayfed saat afar 1 fe grargfiray ?  grarefaat,
waaaMtaat gama, sarrearrghfeard: 1 Tara -
afaaroaaterdintagearrge weg: cafes: 1 Tet BTA
aaa vr 1 aeaqarreafenfasat fadaweg:, TearataTeTa-
wEasaaherat srarafsaty | afaseat saazaraar fad
saraat ar afta) wa wien, oe GMa, Fa FAA
wifey? | sa aaarayfe’ 1 aafe saaarazar afr aar
TaRsgmgatesaareawea wala, fedtaar saat afe aavafee-
TAATATL | TEKIN sa, Tego wear: Fa eH HiT |
waren yar wate, aot afterdtaeora: | grarcaralt aeatferat
TATA |

waq— 1. C, afe:
wre —1,  B. alaatwTaaAAe 2. B.C. atfaar
3, D, acacia:

--- Page 215 ---
av afer [fare
Bqaae:—

MBlETTa eS ws aaateareqey gt
WAAL S eS fag Seah Tey 911

    
  

after: v4

_

sty — Baraat Ro, TAMIA 200;
errata: ¢, wat ast HA Yo; gare Ha TERT aa! 00,
BATA YT Ko | fadlasararatsht HA co, WAT FT Go |

BqaTH:—

IST AT BABA Aealegeaay: ea
| ATATVAT qee MRT aaleAATy

 

raTT: —
afera: ¥2
€¢->
eateat—1.  E, om. the word Jqzaw: 2, E.om. the word 71a:

3. E. om. the word FtTy 4. C, om, aay

--- Page 216 ---
eee: 9% | wegeqrngda dtsemntareatta ay

qdaeasTt Bel Yo, AAT ¥s | fedtasararatsht wet eq,
qa AF ¥s I

fagazeht ataaa [aes lata afaate aaafamaceqeay-
qari: sara vega [a] tf faaeacafraarea-
aaaaararad, TAIT | Aa TelTVaTTeaHATrIT AAT sls
area 1 ga: ? gemvare ‘yefafaat fasta’ [Wato, 3¢] afar
ut msg: tata: wegumfsat, aaaqiesdtat awa
wWieHt: TATAT walter gaa feaeqaafaaracesaisaraad
a aed, ‘qlatarr ia fears aterarargaarg | wa afada
gaqreor aft afagtassrararrariad eft Fa, at a 1
mee | eaRenEt gaat aaa 6 TP cama lata
aaaetert, Temenos: raz afaat [a] afagaéfe 1 aa
farearqy saiteor:, afageidtrearcueaatraraaeratrae-
aosmegrararner TStfaat, Tar w fadiaea ‘araeaqenrcacarar-
WAST T AAT | TeNTeVart ‘cétq=ararl ea |aatarsaaretsts
ara’ afar

aa a aftat aterare qaaa 1 aa acqesafaaraeara
aaa: wegzaar asalfendaftacraisa [a] sada, aa:
afaaattee 18a wepegaar asratfenidtadead, 7 aarzcar
qT: WAS AHH BIT) aregaiaaqafgad—fagacgeateat
feardafargoratital Brat THareye | TaTsetl asat aT arfaarfar-
facareacafama | owataT aeisafierciaareris Asaf
TUFATATSSATT Row Lat waa satn fegata weaTE-
SHAT eaAAT THSTAT | TAT AAT Asat afeare TITAN: |
TATAT THeaIaweAiasaTe seat aviigrraseals
Vey) Tada AAT faawisegfte: qeggafrat, Haart
avai gorsseafte:, grarafeat aaa: 1 aa afraat “arargfirt
Hatta” sarfendon seas weaet | dra fedtaearaar
Hrarigrerawrawsaiais Afar, qemafey art

 

varet—i. A.D. EB. aefafaac 2. A.B, C. om, a4
3.) Mss, tat 4 4. A, araarargt:

5. C. Hapl. om. wer to [:-TET] eaTAeTT, next page,
line 2,

--- Page 217 ---
&@ nfeeraa . f ifort

faaeaaatafeaat eet age | afe fareara aor afe at fraeaat
7 SVSla:, THT Het gramarqiagiaqaseracarg afr
aria TBA | Hae AUT Blea ys aeaa ary aaa
faat, aarsfrgar faayat areat getaaqey! | aeaey qeBTaT
gearsyaey TE: TereHeafaersea TSsTATATTAT ATT:
aq Pera etaea AISI | wT areMaTATTATTET ET: GSz-
MAT AIHA F BARAT Tag: wetrcata® aafeqrfecraar
wd, TA AAMT «1 BT A wATATAAAY aTeTa aay
Aatg faraeaaahtecatefasa’ tt azanfet ward aenr-
mamafaarag agartaecoafacsest | aat ada afiras fear-
THTTATTA TATLAAT 11 VEU

[ asatfenntat araee: |
RUA TAS —
BRAT THAT! RAAT BUA: At |
aa Aaa: ara atfeat: Tal aa Ha seta wafer
‘seqH:——-

faaqenasmied: vecaseaameraieanta |
qemaaaatra os eat fated: un qi

sqreat— 1. A.B. agiarfe faacara ; D, ag afe faaeata ; BE. agar
fafa faaeata

Mss. add *81aT after ST

B.D. war ast Hear; C. sar yHtear ; E. at ynaear
A.C. D, E. setageaq

A.B. C, D, wrasag (erat

E, aassgizararaaat

B.C. fardteaa: + dtfaeraar

E, om. satan: to Temfarg, p. 97, line 7.

era we RY NS

--- Page 218 ---
FATT —

a2
™s - ,
NN
¥ « %

HUTIA—TS THM 3,0; TaAaat 2.94; wHa setae: ay,
wea yet wt | UaRERatast arTaqeaas ar ait atsz. |
wa oftfarszetaat: Hut Tet 90, 94 II

gare: qs | qasusairen: atacet: ae

[ aetsedsarercal: ara: |

qaadalaTEsaaaTaaTEAT ATE

qe WaT ssa: FAT WN | 20 1
qe aa, wea: day: weed, a! aemed waft | a ag

age: qate rqwressarant wate |

Baa H:—

ata anfaened frezacedt met aa get |

aaa aaafaaradet a wag are 7
Fata: —

aD -

after: vv
a

sqreat— 1. A. B.C. om. @:
wtio We 43

ee

--- Page 219 ---
&s ifort { afsas

eum wat amt 2x,51 vast: aaitsivarat: 96 1
mea yay y, srAesar i fedtatgqemastt aearsesar 3

wag wayfraigena sqraafa ) tzrat—adsar AST,
asa Isaaesraaea Hle:, TTS HT TVET ATA | TA"
Tawa —

eqrqe—

afera: vy

qanisa WaT, wasavqkeaaud grasa
qfa:, ‘faonrent ao: waaravt 1 wvsated ghewqrser: | Ta
waeartsorasesat aft dant, gfsasaregia: A fa aa
frasad, ase fadta: wt ta aetegad at’ [Raho Qv| Baa
Heat weet afeararasteargie: aa [aia | seins zt a Ta feaat
WaINt: a wa donyat wicairaarar aqafera: 1 Ta
safeaq wa afd dtraraqaiesey |

[ saqaara: |—

*gramaeMPeoaey THETA eat Teg: | TT ATHTT-
qareagramfageatrered gfvat [gse.; at] fata a ta |

 

eqremi—1. A. B.C. D. read 74
2. D. om, the word rata:
3. A.B. C.D. add 4* after saT
4. A.B. C.D. om. fasarard to yfrasrarcyfi:, next line.
5. E. om, the portion up to TarwyT gY, & next page, line 8,
6. A. B.C. E, saa for q%:, a4

--- Page 220 ---
gore: qo J qesdemered: wearer: ge

aa qfrnetqrare TaTUafesaaHtaas FATT sfeqaiscat waar
auirtarett caratfea: | aaearat at [ Pr rarrcaregar sca, fRaraq
gaaararatafa i 2 u

aTa:—

aaa: ¥% qR

FUIA— MATPHATH: Yew, Tae Hfrarareey fara
ye farsa aeTT «, avareatn afensrareatniaa4 go, wIfaaT
qs | waar aaaarfrd fesrarera ra a AMTFAT VY, 8

seaTH:—
RAUNHeS a wa: casey feat TN: |
arate fe TeAea BTA AT AATESAATT tN

TeEpATaaafts: eto fauftaceat ATT |
feaar sreatft fact werrfrat cat arema? 1 3

qT: —

afeta: ve | ™ -

merararrayiy: = 5, watia: *} .
R R

BTIT THT AMAR TASH: —
Heeraaresral sar are Ifrett Fara |
qenerseat ofaafeaast gear ea aA: ETT UY

 

sareqy—1, D.E. area:
2. E. om, lH to Aaa THR, three lines below,

--- Page 221 ---
{eo —anftverent [ fers

FATT —

FH: 95, THASTATT: TEAST ¢, 4c
Tea TH: 3g," AMTATHATAT 46 Maa Ta 2°
qaaq “sracgad a afray” [ating Rv] efa

\

4

AINE Yo, 5,4 !

We: vs '

i

1

. !

sq: — ¥
atengedt da: vata fronfare: eaAqATSA 1 ‘

weet rear afte: wfery wat eeraat areT: 1K IN

*
Fata: — ‘
4

1

1

4%

afzirg: ve '
1

: 1

i

¥

Met AMMHAT Yo, €.

FAMNATTT TVHATTAIAH, AT | aaa hrs Ty:
Va | Wa qaaaeisarad wees HEIN aaa aa TETRA
FATA HATA A |

sqrett—1. E. om. Fare: to at: 26, next line,
2. E. aat waraa: | TRAE for at: Aq
3. E. om. WAT tc, Weal aed 2
4. E. reads: G8 aqrerqed waa:
5. E. om, Sa@uai: to ¥arTHT Yo, €, five lines below.
6. E. adds qa: after ¥qr 7. D. Braga waTAT TY

--- Page 222 ---
©

weite: Vo J SOMATA: EAT: 904

«il
et

Ber: —

wae wenenged fanfrarczre qe frat

wre aenft get eitst wreaal ast ev

are

qfzta: yo

 

qaanaeq [sari] s, farsaryfe: ay |

HUTT— WISTTTIAGAMIaT, Yok, TT TaTHAaATCTThe
WTSI o  wag? TwaHAAZaH so, fag a evi wa afak
FAATATY TATATT To, 324 I

“saa H—
Heya HA Neal gered Tad HATA |
sent at TS TEMAEATAT To 1
sateat—1. E, om. ara: to ty, three lines below,
2. D. adds qeaq 3. A.B. C. om. 4
4. EL a miro aeafearg , cifracat waa: 1

5. E. om. [sqzaa: to ware foe] Fee, next page, line 5.

--- Page 223 ---
402 mforerrr’a [ «fora

aT

afm: 44

 

ama ¢,. frasmayin: wo 1 wad qaqa [ogee aay,
WET; TATA 958.

HEATH MHA AAAI TATCARATAAT TTISAT, aTETA
AAI, AE qhrmadrwagy ws

SeaTH: —

uearatersr ardt went qatat feat weg: |
araet eet ema: feaaergwarepsiq 1

feet andy ee: rota sret fant areit areata 1
area area gat! aie area waaiea® sh

“aTe:—
t
qr

afta: ye & q
g

saremt—1. D.E. 2a 2, EB. wat aay

--- Page 224 ---
wim 4s | gararigereatagy 403

qeureqatA— alqrednysafa acy ay: 3¢, wWeaser
warat sf ATTA Qo) WAT ATTASTT 21 UaaTsetenfa, aaarta
ase HET HTfaTAT ATT ATIe 90, 51 TeaIe oTeaqfaa
ae sferrrrcarraritraeeaez |
TeeTH:—
ararafirer andl Tage aetsx aceatste |
RuenATMTA gatset fea area! ue
q

rare —
9

afzaq:; 43 zg qo 2

qaaceed afrorrceatng at TAA’ 21 ofeararareqafarce
meant: <1 Fastiantaacbtaerdagttcey

a4

TATE FT TasAT Fay “Gea qHaT: wera Hay:
a: [thtto, qo] xearatafa 1 go 1
[ qaranrgazaraag ¢ |

qaraTENwaTTaE—

MAA F IA MATA wsTIg7aIe |

aeTaaT TT AAT GRIT: II gsi

 

eaqreat—1, D. E, data 2. FE, 36 7
3. Cy aaa 4. CLE, araq:
5. E. om. the word tata: and the figure.
6. D. aarna

--- Page 225 ---
qo¥ aferaqta - { afer.

Tea Ste HF? Fas, aeMMsHwsTgsy | gens,
araT OT Aas TAT | wmaegueta, wR | By? ort
aaa 1 rataalain: arena: aatta aaatarafaatsraat:
SAS: | AT TTaATTTT Teal Taare Tera | ArT ae aeare-
wed, sarienfata aad | were: WATT: | TeATT werfasara-
eqeT: MTU AReaTHVSAey, MeTSATATT ART AT | ATATaCITT
wosaearedsaqaaistaa se = SAVAA, FT TAT Aa: 1 aTATAT
AMT TRTTAT WAT: |

Sea: —
aifafasneraniaasy ailanfaeat: eafira aerseat |
at afacgia wat faaeat caetedt: afegetad: 117 0

Fa

 

afere: yx

A. B. C. hapl. om. of arataay:

eaqreai— 1.
2. A. hapl. om, alatt to wet; B.C. om. arate to td

3. A.C, D. gaqat faa; B. om. fg
4. E. om, fara: to #t7q, p. 105, line 1,

--- Page 226 ---
sare: 4% | sidierforeret qo¥

HUNT TAT FAT 0% Ye WATH Oe, 992 1 Aaa
AT: 6&1 WAT Asay We BeRAA: <, Wel 2, TeIeT ST ea
[ adétafnaa |
ayer setq rasa aE —
¢ Ne 2 8 + * L
ge 84H chad ATIGWMTT aga qeay |
seytqatrerd aaqssast sardgaq ll ee Ul
meq, Sfaay | faaatta ateq | afean, afar) agda,
garraraift strafeqarit [var] anf qetersdareaed, ae
qan aia sf agéy | sat yo ae aga | aqe, qaurfz:,
We Fat ait eft ayay | mead wats | geghnaq, gota
ofrafiseyfinagy? | gees, gczeq qTeaeq at gate |
wa agit garter qraneraferath, ant sardaist areca: |
‘gee ap efraqacp aga’ ef neqaaaard Gay | ‘weq-
faeginafrcerra’ aft wager | ged aaa ATA TAIT
aqay eeaeaa fears | gee te afray TTA TAT
aqafiseyinatsery gracias | Ua
warfa qrataatssdar wfrararfa 1 aria aaa aha
qrafasare:

SqeeaH:-—
aifaigad get sige: gaafa stat alfr y
Teg: ase fret Meats aa ah 1 an
aa: — aife: 2, TAT 3, Tes y |
PUTT BE TVG: Y, TH v, afaaA 2, saw «,
TESA s, TIKIT | Caeasenver yfnt add araH vo |!

Wa 1. C. aqarery
sareat—1, EF. aataaer for zai: 2. E. faseroq
3. Mss. add afaa after sta

4. E. reads only meqeqy s, ad4ayq, for the portion zara:
two lines above up to this.

trdo Mo y¥

--- Page 227 ---
qo% aforerara f. afreo
saITH:—

aecratfadeat: wea saafa stat Feat: 1
TRISTAN WEY Hea TA ats 11 2 1

rave: ~ wife: co, SAT Y, WEE 5 |

qaacaed Herd “3, adTTT 0% |
R

areareeararaaay seaa: —

waTeMeawar aa’: wulanfaieg: 1
Tareas aa ate Tanase frag 2

leqra:— aTfe: w, TAT 99, TEA: VY |

au — gee TSeatamia: zy, ger canafafs cH wT 4,
maay ata UTA o, vaeTaqafafa qearat farcat aafaefa: ev,
SUWTT ev, AFA V9, Taseqaay’ | sqwresIAIT Wa
gait varfa aaifamfa: 23 1 wa: qantas wary Qe 04 |
fandeg gaqatfs catafaafa: 1 wate qaafaenfaanea qaeq
aAA 29 |

HAUTL FACTTASEATIAL ATA SAMH: —
Tulfeegurased fat GA alah aareaa 1
szatfa agama: same wa fas:
aferes: TeaeAeH TTT AMIBTTTT EAT |
qsafedtasaea wag ad fe aaleaa uu ¥ 1

eae — ate: %, SAC R, WG 301 Ga ISqaMe aa
afacs wmacaed emery agafad amesd aeafife

eqreat-—I1. EF. om, *ata: to <TH, next line.

2. E. agfaafa: stegqer sawaifeaded aqaneass wafrerdeay |

3. D. wriotdatqeeaed 4. E. aateafaaqerq for 2&0
5. A.D. E, aff: for va: 6. A. B.C. om. wa
7. E, om, Fata: to 7128: 30, same line,

--- Page 228 ---
rete: 48 ) Uaiaforery Yor
amt qo x82, aafafa wat ¢, aferafafa? ‘i wad? aqafafa cs
serea fort “{, agafafe <3, gseqfrafrseratafat zeqfing
R 2
ard coy | fedtracarfa ~qy |
SeaTH:—
aSaaRtfad eneqacesaMera TEE: |
faurmeaantat aaageat morat wert Xt

FATT —

[arfa:] a4, Fat 45, THE yo, aE cafehaay’ y Hey
meafeqarta Tari qo | Ast GaHTT QR |
VATA SUTATEIT Gacaraiqeas—
quasar qalgaa |
aaa HANTT: THR: | aTfara weaTa aead sy arfeeretar-
faut ofeqad, weamsearc ary | Tere | Ie weE:, arated

Tala, THT SF TeMdeRa Taraeg cardyfafinserafreayaaar-
feszat safe |

qITT:—
asafate: mg: wdtanaa ay waa |
QeATS a WeAET waNTaEA NE
"eaTa
atiereaey x, TTT OY, WRT: 99
~ e 4 - =
, PTW ATIT Yoo, Tard qo aaa als aarMaeay
Xyo* | R

eareat——1, E. om. eff aa

2. E. om. @ff here, as also in similar places below in this para
3. C. om, Wag 4. C. aseqforafafa

5. D. saateg 6. A. Mata Bree

7. E. om, Fara: to waa aftr, two lines below.

8. E. afeaqded for x40

--- Page 229 ---
4qou afererara { afte
TAATH:—
aifaeateqed Grad stead at ag: |
qanfa aracsitet ade aq feaz gq ho 1
rata: —
aifaad 9, HATA Joo, TEATAIT Coo | ade qdaq
Yo¥o I ee I
[ aes |
TRATATAT TAZ —

mAs aaeafuag Fyurraeeagag |
qa feqaradt eitaaftd aemaq tl 0 Il
meg: gear [Tard fer aa | meerereafinara sreeTf ea eT

a fre sectacafiray | aearatereginana 1 ferreracfateniaara,
faqresrerarfara fsyorfe:, feqortenzer a faire: feqor-
qarfarg:, faprgafatcedr at: feporgaaieat:, fee
qavanwain gd feymreaaairaigd, sem feqoearaz
famaaigaa wera [attra] asclreafaread” fermad
faquearararees faqorfa:, aa faqorfaat oat ferred, earazor
afad etaveafad, az Sito ada eft aed, ad afaa, weet wats 1

‘saqeurn:—

arfe: asa Maa: aarmasdiat’® wasseat | ‘
qsatiand ged neal ana: faaicaer 7

FATe: —
aif: ¥, Fate, THTAA Sy |

 

saTeqt—l. A. B.C. D. hapl. om. of ‘3, sere’
2. C.D. aifead 3. D. aaa
4. E. om. the word 3q2a74;
5. E. om, tava:—arfa: ¥, tat 6
6. Mss, eat for I>aT

--- Page 230 ---
gets: 29 J] faferraerrta qok

eT TeEATaaerirfefa  THRTAANT TET TT
a afd ate x3z0 1 fag: af: qo, waqacfasted 3, waa
am: %, WAT FIT WT Y3RB, arena 93, feyiat <¢3,
eaAMAT w afst ¢, TSTT Qo, AE TST: ¥ |
FEIT: —
aaarel afage aa aeateaa vt maT |
TAGE FSF FETA ATT ATETA UR
aTe—
gife:s, SAX e, WMT yoy 1 Taaeersed TEIATTA
qq NRolt

[ fafaaamraq |
asa a Saas —
cara aa ATT |
qsun: a faftaattaagaal fgay at ll ee
sat a aifass TaUa 1) THAT sea: Faraz: |
waracfaraet sofafarr cvatareasfafa: 1 safafat tet
wataufeaa fare 1 ta catacafata: egategead | AeA
gaat: TEAM aaa, TTT iT gHacatat: CHAT TT
aarnt wea: wat: | TTT TR, STATA, FACIAL |
wagad waft— aE:, waaTAT:, TTA TST sYIe, Tat aay
aat:, WAR: qefataartaa:, a fafaaa: faadafeatrar: THAT
agra: | warea Hopgia:— daqaea:, FH a aes | AHI,
aaqaea ot: dareaa:, faadt waa fare: gewt: eaqaet | ar
aner qeeg caring a caqafactsct astra fafeerat wafer |

saeaH:—
qsarmaserat agéatat a oa: watfeaaa: |
aeBeaufeasto | eafrat a]? eae U7 Nt

 

sareat—1], E. om. the word Uh
2. E. om. 34@a*: to qaqnrTy 2, 4, lines below.
3. A.B. C. taaarraarag
4. A.B. hapl. om. of gafafa: 5. B.C, om, water:
6. The mss. actually read eafaerfa for eifaenat a

--- Page 231 ---
410 aforererrt [ «ferro

ea (FT -—

A Ld

afte: vy
TATRA WEB: Yc, VY

PUTA — TF TST YL | TAHT: € 1 GaAs: |
Vast FATT ATT: 290 1 Te TSNaT: THTATT ETAT Tas sy

fadiairerncay—— dare ¢, ger aa. 298, aa? fager
aft vefita viet: 490, daa sense: aErTTNT TAT wala ay |

WIAET Teel TATA 92 0, Yeo HR II

[ atfafaaa: cafafaaase |
AAT SAAT ATE —
AmeTararal mara Gredafitaer qeaiser: |
Tifafica: a watatiait wafers 1 22 II

We Uh ade aft da) ae weer ada she ATE: |
WII: SHATTT: | We asaraa ax =z [aa lanes a qe x
qaaTegrarta | agt deaqsaqeri wT ETT | aa dafnd
favafnry 1 Sat aay? sHarai APATEATTA | asia: |
cea faafnaer qestse: yet art: | wifafrer: @ wad) aaeq
fafa: aifafa: atfaada: aifrfre: | TTTFAIMTT: | Fafrerit
wafateaara | Fada: agearat sft aad) aca falta: aa
fafoaat wate t

aura— 1. D.E. aqaafr

 

 

--- Page 232 ---
rete: R2 J

wifafaar: cafafrara 994
Sze: —

RATATAT eA AMITT aga Aaa:

uefaerd area’ qaeacreat fg aatea: qo

“OTE —
x] |
ZL |
s Ss qe

afte: ye

PUOA— "Ts 9, ‘HH o, Tae ATT VY | waar qari
AAT: ovo, TEwaT: aitfafrrararry qvo | Hearty zarHay
AST Vo¥, Yesy |

aafrarqazaa:—

agraratitaaa: qeaaqiaertr faidea: |

weraafeaen: araqederer: KAM! 1 zu
aa

 

aftaq: yy

saTeaT—1. A. B.C. atsar
2.

E, om. 91%: to FTA
3.

» next line,

A. D. E. om, 7 9 4

Mss, t#

--- Page 233 ---
4492 aforaard [ atmo

afta: yc

 

Ten —fafregaat | as araea career [aforato,
28] geared iaarfete: 9 cee Say, wae Ve &, TaTda
Teas st Haass: Tarai wat gy, ser af. aafafa-
BAT wae 1 a ARYL eA RL TTA TF G00, 2o2¥ RN

[ seIeate ufsgadaiaaq ]
sal Umeataaiaaay SUATATATE!—
arraer & anifeaaes atacasy |
Tae MATT HAE oR I 23

ArT: TAT: | eT SAT Trea: aerst watt gata args:
There | Tes aevsien | fe TTT 1 ania, A: | faeteade, goa
aa | fafrearrg— aiavota 1 astiaal: arqat: qitgrqs: aTTAATT:, &
aATGETH arqH Ay anifemtaag | wae waead, 727 Jara wep zat
ag wale | feng, waggera | yratead, PUR: Fat: THT
aat:, + yaaa fare |

Saar: —

wat a aga acaaaai set ade era:

art a aati gan gerarsaai Wet NT
qaa— 1. A. B.C. & for fe
earemt—1. A, D. E. om, this introduction,

--- Page 234 ---
wie: 2x | Traqeredaaaag 443
lea: y yg S
wv 8 qo
BUTT — THAT aTat a Arsh: ¢, WET aT: 64; TSA
AT: 2y, AEM at: 9a, THA wy, AIMaTfad TSaTtaGdiaeT
famratq i Fa AT: vo | Mean SAAT AGT? a aaah eT: Ro]
TIAN TATHAT &3, co lt 23 Il
[ Paryrataaaq |

TURTLAATATATS —
fealiqag aatie saaciy dgareqay |
weaged det aayRTs zfraq |i Vv |
aa: ofa: faata:, faaleiot aera feafage:, cee faeta-
gona. weatiaeatg— aaaia i eueacenin agar | galccaeat gaat,
BUIT AT: sarah, da garawain agar 1 fealaqona
vamtg aaiearacain fafaraeqay | aera eat qad
wreagray | oat fatfeay | aera cea aateq grate
gay) afat afary
sae: —
aaritscal goat eaat aawat waa feaaT
AAAS FAA THT al aatateat qu

aa — Aa: so, WAT 21 Fah: 95, WAT |

HUA aat: o, wag fenfaya 32; gaat 2, Ter am: y,
mat dam: 34 1 weT Fae, VAdaraty gat co, AAA «|
aaa sherat TTT ¥, 2 |

factargerastt qorartt weal ¢, 2 1

wea Tamara TraTeahaegeay 11 Vv

sataat—1.  E. om. 7414: to Fw , two lines below.
2. D.E. agut qatar

Bydto Wo Ty

--- Page 235 ---
4a  anfrere® [ aferato

[ qasamaa |
Ta RATATAT AAS —

qand and waqagaryasgsa |
aya qarala Heat BPARAT | ay Il

qa wate, na afa:, qrer wea gonna ‘ae Terr aT
af and, ana asa gaat qeHafaia araq | aTaqayst, Bret
a qt a aaa, stage JAY aq qawaey aq saqayt
yaBAT | wiqaafeged, [ad yore wat aaretafs, weacT
ala. adqanfe:, qasdsagal art efa|, [aetletaeare gat-
ayaa aqiaarn:, aat wdqaper gad waqeralageny | ye, Tea
ua fasarfeaea yet aga | geri, qearer TaATetT TA YaT-
afaq | wagd, TTT CTY BIAZAT | eayeet, caeq yaeT Fa
TaAAAHAT |

BqeMHI—
aaa waer Gat a a freq waem amet THAT |
aragagiaeed ag az ate mata arateargy 1 7

“sata — Joo °
q ¥ A: Y, FAT RI
° &

FTI — FARA THA &, BATATTT Vvoo | wITAeaie:
QYoo, AAI FIA wool WATT FA wo, Fatal 2o, BACT
fea lqare aay x |

sere Taufata — afe qaea arfaat afe: Sa Tar
aqfunta: waag: [v=asaer| ar afatefe |

 

emzqi— 1. B. om, 4% to FARAA, three lines below.
2 AC. a

3. The mss, read : qaea ofa: qaafa: 1 ad yaaa: wraaefe:,
Hata TIA WHT:

4. E. om. ara: to Bt, three lines below.
5. B.C. om. Wana wa; E. qa aa

--- Page 236 ---
vette 2€ J aerferesy aay

eqTa:— q w
Goo y
y °

aed 9.1 vacafgat waafe: ve warfT < |

TIATF.—

qeafananitaat afed aaa ar watamaaifaal afa:
ar aaaretaraa Ta, Te Taal TSahrataset STay Taanl-
AM) TasSrat ard HI Satamcaifeas afe:, at ar qeataala-
ag. Taarasgerar afafefs zu

eaTa:— RX o
q x
oR

¥
4

wed qancta qeatamdaifaat afg: », walaafaqesr
qoarat area qfa: 3
x

TqeTH—

maea nifaat afer aad | Req waaferraa sgaat IS4-
fate: ag ASI Fer SISAATHY | AASATAT ATT FT A WATT
aifaat af: ar ar maea ag: tSaarasgaaa afafefa us i

rat — qoo °
q x
0 4x

Ara: 4, AHA WY I
asay— qaaq maqta: qo, Waag: TSaTATaTT
afe: x URN
[ werfeq |
aufrasfrarearaeraiatare —
TERA TAA ed Hear |
wed caraufad aeqrigearnae earq t 2g

--- Page 237 ---
WAR afrarart [ aftrao

Hal: WETMEA ATT TU RITATTETATT |

aat tere: aarear: frei: 1 Paerfit: caterer afirereatar
aufan: 1 tute Garcie: dufranarefer, | ag aeferenererfing |
wamse: qharaaearieas socaersfraad aaa 1 aaadvariisd:
aise sfrafea: ? sera'— gare) at a aera sfafara
faerie tases satarat 1) agar fe ofafaea Area: oferat:
fagares deardar: | Fatessenaer: aT aT WITT | Aa: TIAMAT
aterferat ofaret sfrareafa 1 searafirar gat sea, atsat ererfir:
a scarfs ga: fad, Pafrsarerfirar at ofa pear ae,
asraray | Rafreare— serefed, carretera afew
aftay | vena frarart: sarorafsrara | resent, cearat: Hat,
Sawa, Tarifanataas: | eafala weet cepetHeaTITT |

wa aufanaa taanfafeaararaiaue, tSasafermey-
squafatear, saramerear: ? sea — aqarastisraradararaae-
fasey ; Farqoradiat adta geaueafen fagult 1 ga?
waufearatat aefrsarsaraangy | wera! TacreaTeaea chara
aaa: ? qsowrerfs arfened ded, acaefee adufrad,
qauerh aufraageeafwears setaReIaTaeaTA: |

Fal YA: UAT: Tea: STETAT Ht Hoea fea —
Bar: atereAT wafer WHITTEN

Bal. TWETLET FAT: Meaeasa: | Harfaeaa wTE— aver
TATA | TOTTI: TLETTTAATAT TITHE , AEATE ZOAY
Trae TFS, THTUST TT, a Hfeaenafae: 1 Fed To.
TUR TBAT | TT RTT ATTA WOT RTTATTSTET: I
MACIAT TURTATATT TT Sar: TEITTAT: A TTHTIAAGAT: ATTSTT-
earet | MTT Mafra, MITTS TTHTRRAT: | TATA
Waa AIayTIATITTEAT Ta, AATAIAA Bal: TEL AMAT
MUTA TAT ATTSTT 1 TBAT, aT THT eeATTATTTT |

aqreai—1. B.C. D, vt for saa
2, B,C. om, sfa to aeardtar:, next line.
3. E. om. ¥@: 4. B.C, gear

--- Page 238 ---
wetted 2e-20 ] wofirss aye

SeQNH:—
awaaraa ase staf war fg eamafe: |
waatea wat aed [fa] eae 7 it
aa Ta eaTTAT! | sa A—

meray get faddt carga cretary’ 1

‘ wegaerfertea aufemeatia wa: 1
Rtg |

OTE — g ¥ q
BUA Sredaty: qatar at TAT, THT
wate: | wha wor fafata eegrafa: 1 att eagrafaar wa-
ufatfira: y, sarrafaat vata frasat t 1 aa gag art a4
savage “agend tay” afa wafting *: 1 wed aged erat
a [war | ae: & wet: 2 i
Sze: —
awa ania: aesamidariatesnte: |
qaRaged vitet ages F aera 1 VU

71g: — Rooo qo qoo
q 4
M R
aatme TAITAI— ooo XY x04
% R

HAT. TVET RATT ST TTHTLATIBAT ATTTT TAT |X, &
Rareat Barat arrget ghraT ATA: Qoooo | | zTHTRAT:
209, 49 BAaTata:|° 90249 | Taaeerse frets: qo, faite:
WMTeT sos |

Seo

 

eqreat—1. A.B. C. E. era 2. C. om. wattat
3. B.C. om. FT 4. E. om. ®9: 2, start 2
5. E. om. this uddesaka and the next.

6- Mss. read: 202 1 9a aee feerfaaiat: arfeottamer * 4)

--- Page 239 ---
498 erforerrre [ sferre
eqarH:—

aearfa: asddtanareat avad oa aaa |
waaay fared aasaaiite fe way TET 8H

ata: — | q
4 4 4q
8 Q X

aatnaa— [ 2Y 3 é ]
2 x

[qaaencote | paattaeed yTATear arTaT: 9%, YS y,
TAT 42

SAITH:~—
ann fanfagea: sfanutega gerd |

wafa a asain sfafaraifatadt sreaq iu ¥

ala: — AF: woo TETeAT:, Tanerateqay 3, sala
[areqarsaart: 3]

ya qSeaqafaqganaiaqa ager Agta afaria taraT-
nalfgater eartat—

a2) Fat: 9, TaTATTETaAT yao |

ase feqar: y3
4
3

fasrefarsactatargaraasary | Terat—
SIOMH:—
areal areareray aear efa ara: svatterat: |
ueiwer agen wf ara walat uy

taTa:— WeAY aleat: oo, AAl SEAT: 3, TWeaarararaarar
ATA Yood |

 

sareti—1. Mss. read q=a in place of T=

--- Page 240 ---
geited 24-29 | asacrfarny 498
wart aufsrarare:—
QeTaFAT: 44, AFA: &, AIAFATT: Good |
gat aa afea:— carenfaatearary: wee) areal qeaa,
aaaran agen faaeat ateat: aft weaT aFat: 62s! Tada
AFaT: 23 |
qa waTHUTSACyS ee: —
anaerg afta: wasarauleqarar: |
AIM: agadedt aa wed aa fe aq ne
raTa:— FATT 9, 2, 3, Vr Yl AM: AH qooo |

PIA TATHATATAT 9¥, AT ATA: Qooo | AATHATT

wha grearfneatfe ae: aren [gamer] ‘5, fader 772,

qatvet Roo, Wgaer 4, TeaHET Ap” 3
3

frraseqaeaa:—
waa gatas settorseta & aferst: 1
eafatiatar arcetat fear” wero i
ata: — —s 4 q q 1 ary: &3 |
R 3 5

na facanfoaeaata Bayo: aeaale’ fa aahort aT: Fak
a2 lB: watered aredeaar: HAA: 42,5, 3 1 wast Taaerets-
ama wpa [att] 231 AAT Teed aTHET ge ATT: cate:
qaK Tapiraey Aufaafaets aTsaT ATT: FE, V¥, Z|

[ saufiraq |

qSaufas seearH:—
aaafanta eatq IS4 fear atanesazarat:? |
ata aa faner afe wenfod caat gga ns it

 

saremt—1. E. wmferyrt: ia place of eis
2, C, way for fearg = 3. Mss, SeRATRTTT:

--- Page 241 ---
4Re nfnaart [ free

eat: — qoo Ro
4 &
y

FUTA— TARATHME Goo, ¥, Ro | ee STH: 1 fedia-
aufraa— afe aaa wre:, wea: fave ef weet era: Fz |

qaea aired grag frat saci wate | cari saca
ara efa [wa et a] sarnafeary, tafe nerzfin: faarat efer-
ara: fafafa farfa: se 9 gegrefe: | aa qaata zeerefir:
sata gira: warrefarscat faasaa, wa qeaea 1 aurfira-
yaaa feet arafeqaq | Bar aft qaaz qarcamerTt TTETT
Taefeq |

[*saaarar: |—

[ waeq ataga |sytaes afe: sea) qafama: qeaare-
sqaaar: at afefefa <i

FATT— — Joo: RY aera 3
x 4 4
¥ 5
BqaaH: —

[waeartages |* arargaaes afeedqsqat eget: | aaT
qearmat saarasgaaea® aT afafefa i go i

“QT: — Goo Yo
qo

AO K AIO a

ast STH: TSE, MAAAMTATIT 3 |
9

 

eqreqt——1. The mss. read 73fa
2. E. om. this uddesaka and the next.

3. A. B.C, D, waeqremse 4. B.C. agenar:

--- Page 242 ---
xeiet 26-20 ] aenzifirertt 424
qaTH:—
fama: atafat: cede Sat wae afs: |
Ma AISAAT WaltA F AAT 1
ara: wefaated anmmrgdeg wr aaa afe: 1
aear Bafaned aramcaagat un 47

aaiara eqrqgat—

vq V9
R Ww
& 4
x qo
v °
3

aq wonga [2, faatrer:] wv, faatrearmes 38 |

[ aazrietry |
aay SETH: —
aafesaea wfnteancattadarmaey gar
aa Hear arard fared aygafagantary i
aSw ory ares aa afer: fie EaTT |
wtettanfarieratent gaeterat AKT: WIT

eqTTAT— 9 y
Zo Qs

& \9

8 °

aed TqaRSTT: VW, Aah 2, Sfewwrar: 3
sae T:—

qequney Beraifeoares versaes saa ferreeaesadar:
HAT THAT ATA Tar Tar eyfewaea Taegan
fe aay 43

sareat—1. E. om. tava and the figures following.

2. E. om. this uddeSaka and begins with ua 44 etc., next
page, line 8.

Atdo Alo 1%

--- Page 243 ---
RR afore? [ afore

*ateq:— v 3
& x
X 8
x
y °
R

qe FST: 9, Saat 9, araat 2, manaaA f
va vaureatfag atsar: |

[ saraterfarney |

mea TATA ATT | | ta arHTeararefarata faire: |
aTaraT—

[ saaera:]

qsaatatra oer qserft stem caf gacter gar aar
aqeatators farts u ex a

qT ¥ 4 v

wa TSaalatydss TAT Tee carta gahr: Gea qforar:

gant wafa 1 ut qauivagindaageatatragett waft va
asatit Tala 2o |

vafeared a oafe sqraniasa aarnafad asad aar
TearaieaTaasHeniase fafafe aa ‘neta PUTA SEH TAT
[astearat] watea, aera ager ef sarard amare: [aut
aTr~ere: | .

STITT
aedl fren qerwagéangiata aaa
aearefanata freer: HYSTA AeA: 11 VK
=aTq:— 5 qe 5

asd ferer: qv It Re-26 I
[ Bareaaraq |
KATANA TAMA FATA TAS —

Haye age weet aT FATA | Ro II
earet—1. A.D. E. aavfate

--- Page 244 ---
wate: 20 ] eT TOT 423

s

ae Ber ada aia ahaa fe ae? uftSery | wa aad
ufred fratageat— ‘Bert aoe qweray’ sft | Bat TT
aeq ufseqer azifred Baqny | ARITA TTT, waa
erfeeReraTy Ufa: TB Tae, satarha [xrfereaafraea: |? 1
aera’, dee fadfat et aaaq | tequiaagaee gaya
fasrcra |
Seer: —
MT TS TAMA aguenredgers |
ata feaqaed fara acest nan

qT q q q q
R & qR v
BUT gat: 2 t, wat geeresaea aforat aesat uaeit
ahqen | Uha gl gaegetacrfaar cargar 3 43, feta [2] 1
ud agaufaat 3 3, weet eH GI
SqaTF:—
we oes wet getae afgd fra’ xeey
wel Foal great far: eSATA 2 1
raTT; — 4 q 4
R % 3
fadieeas cearrat—
q q q 4 4
R & 42 R0 4
et TERT AIST ATH BT 9, 9 I
Sea: —
ag ocean watreemit arated |
aaa Tratet at eae [sore] frag meg 3

 

sareqt—1. Mss. corrupt: A.B. wargae farwer ; C. aaraTate
farmed ; D, wargaaa faraeri E. om. this passage.
2. E, wavifgaat: 3. E, Wearitd (wr) for aera
4. Mss, add wae 5. B.C.om. frag meaq

--- Page 245 ---
are aforerrrt { afro

‘aT — 9 PF a Poa %
XY & 4 9 , ¥
wee TITRA 4 R q
8 Ry q
[ faqvtawd ]
wirettracrsaetasae—

TUB ATT AATVNEd Aalea TAHT |
a So: asqaqistaa: qaeq Aq tt 2c 1

ger ame: yrs ara ot cfraaaatee | serge
wafer] | meget wafia aorere:, [2] TTR TUATT WafeT |
aa: asta, ge a: ag: ada a facteratorgaat vate |
area: tara, TisTag: & ag fardanafe’ wats |

aa + seared sam: vafwar: 1 ezaeasft a arate
agifesrmad ‘af saad sma ardifefa gran, araat
rare aretfaft srrare: | aaa [ferfasar fat) eerrtayy,
afarrataonaatafa sfitca 1 adit faqdacarea sara gorsre:,
eaveturated amare: | aersaT fardaadia arestiaaa 1 afer
aes sae seo: sfacaest featfracare , afer
fasteaedt fercqeatfaearfz | ud ada cqarad faqdratt fratsay |

AA yeTH:—
fay waatd afaaed faanfsa qa: |
aw Rea fat wae eq feaq waa 747 1 1 uN

avq— 1. B. om. aTgU to stfrcitartfn two lines below.
sareat—1. FE. om. tara: and the columns following.
2. D. fardran fread fer

3. E. Long om. from sf@, up to the beginning of the next
verse UATE etc., p. 125, line 11.

4. A. B.C.D. aa’ for fafasar fat
5, Mss. qaqoaifaateta ares

--- Page 246 ---
wits: 23 | aareeacediecorfatry: qRy
PATE 27, V4, VAT, 27, 2S vo at, acafratrrsd
STF 1
FUOTMIT— AesF STG, Tahara qs ©, svat zat ¢,
fafadad 3, TAT qy, Tat qe, afd aweIy wo |
AAMF:—
faqs safagis afer cient aafert qa: |
wed fafireg aeara fangta fe waz nz 1
ATA — 3 9H, VAT, VS, FV, YH Ast BIA YQ 1
qaaaTTT XW Ret

[ wAmatadiecnfae: |
Tea aa gy lraa as

Uys Ua TRI feed TRI |
ajha wa et VAT AT WATT UI -2e II

uifaar Sr uegan t [uega] wegafreqaar arqarsaread
tira sastafa if ag: ge Taaarafafe qatar | TeeET Tr
Tema, TAT’ | UTI was aq TeaTTTTad | fafa
qaraa fiftsataa aay | aaaafa cueqaanaertariafaase-
earrat sevate | afarsceqraaisaisdt a aad a Adeatratqase-
earhararasrtit gar gaa carat aati waa. afe tag
aaa ATA ARs EMMA THATATTH kaa, ATATaTAHTASET
aaaaer fag | fama ua ate, at Bea, Gt A FT I
ara: oefeft agraaata afaqeaq i ay ata: | casita glace
“grasa agaaraaaceara” [asetearal, 9. 2. xo]

 

eare—1. A.B. om. afd ; C. has atfad for afr
2. C. Tahar
3. C. aaATaTE

4. The commentator Somesvara, however, writes : diaqrnzt-
aranhrana aay |
5. Mss, corrupt: @ava for aay

--- Page 247 ---
VRE

aforerare [ fete o

Reese HIT | Ae arse: eh: oS hehe a caret adhe Bea |
et May | ede, aaet TaTaT Ter MARRS aa TaTAyeaT |
me warty, ed ad af aq ade vate |

SIT —

HeTTaStefren eat gar eat ae
geraaaaa [asa]? afaanteraxart sf: |
qaramfe a anager annaamerat

quat a gee gueantid faciet wera: 41

aT — 30, 3G, ¥&, Yo |

PUT — waht aaah wa qey 1 saa qq’ 3 |
ary wed Ta yy | CaeATE waaTeaqtes Tera" RY,
fadlaaqenramtaser qe, galaater HUOASLTT &, ALANA

faaaasear y |
TeITH:—
AUTRATHS CAT UTATASEQIATS FATT

aseanfetegtaatna edt ga: |
eat adat gam @ frag ared cag fafead
get Ta Hzrhaafnd gee Tae Vn

eaTT RS, WW, WR, VU VY, QB, R41! may waaay Rh 1
“TE Tah 4; X, 3, %, 4%, a os ol RS il

 

area — 1.

eNy nA YN

11,

A, B.C. tat (?); D. B. faae
A. B.D. E. aa; C. 37r
E, om. Fata: 2°, 3%, w&, Ye 4, E. aatnqaq

E. Warvaqieg 6. D.E, add wafa here
A. B.C. atet; DE. faq
E. da 9% OE. care

E. om. ara: and the nos. following.
E. om, J4% 4% and the nos, following.

--- Page 248 ---
wie: 20 J Hahei cery 429
[ WRataMexcny |
TT HUMNST THT TATA AAT —

Uferaaty frag ti gerieg erage |
ad gfrerged aaagd wala grag’ th g0 il
Yaameafrnaqerseaiadtad 1 afrararrat afer

BAR TH ghrarate, afrmaqeraeqarrawiad: | fate gh:
qeateg wanfetoy 1 anfuaaia gatae ay a earatarfretag
sedate 1 erafaaeieaata a fasiqased ad afeyaa 1 wrt
arefearq | wad gfeargean, gee ase aq Tirarqeay | amiga
watt ged, Faria ga aed aaa wae |

TANF: —
ARAL TANZEHT afore fared gerrfaat: art
WARET ATT Bees Tea Sa ReATATT 1
ma gem fateer zeanitfada fretaed? |
aed Hewyed gratia geaaat 1 4
S-qTT:— ig qoo
g So

wey Tfrarat 2, erafaHay 20, rarer frente tr
fanad tenedtner yeaged! a q01 aaATaT geAeT wena
Wea vo, fattae7 So, [eq leageanaaraa [a] wai TATA Woo
THAT |
see
FEGTIM ateeaer aA SRT Rafer: |
urea vent faeared omer womfears 1

WeY— 1. EB, aeeay for qeay
wareaqT—1. A.B. C.D. om. am
2, A.B.C.D. defective : aa gxireaeitfadd fedtaer ;
E. aa guia eset seareititday

3. E. om, ata: to BUTT , below. 4. B.C. qed ge

--- Page 249 ---
42s arforerata [ afore

Feng T Ma SERA aTeat faq carat
geotfa aa ala aed fact a qeata aat: 2 tt
rq: — 5 Ro
FR zo
wer Tear PEHATAMAHeT YeAT VX | JIMA RIV
saat: |
Ua Va far AAATATT aTAATAarT Taya, TIT UF
aqarft 1 araaracdaaria sqterer afreitaeat 1 terat—
[sqtara: |
area aaaad aa F BIBT; TAT galataaradaiearat [7]
eqarmt, feared AAAAATAT: 1 3
aT — » %
2 4R
aura— garg aferarat aracraai fare: sate ys x | wer:
qe soafaae: x aracrafeaan wrafaarer aerarse ATTA
SHAT 4 | CIA ATA AAT ATT qaaaeaT TAB FTA: BAT 9, 2;
EAT CATT SIT TAT SAT: | TAAL Y%, falar aes qe |

SIT -—
aa afar: aca [aT] SITReaATeTaTeTH [a] afemrara i
amamat! a saaint ear fr gfrnrqgerq a ¥
#qTa: — & 3
R 43
ae wlrargerg 49 |
mat Ta: STHT: Mea waleat TaI—
agaae—
aa qfamt eanagianfa: aco d afr [a] 1
aszran waaieaanr [war] fe qfargraq uy

eqieat—l. BE. om. ata: 2 42 FIA
2. B. Sanly 3. A. B.C, D. om, a4

4, B. saterarar

--- Page 250 ---
wate: 39 | aT TeTTTATR qe

qa — g yee
R495
ga afar soft gaa, wr aa: Meata qaeafa |
aa: —
ae HOTTA? soy THA AAMT TARA? areeTA |
farce aang atset at fa a agtat
‘aa Ufrar sae meat yfrarer: yeaa, wer-wEAT eTaTT
a meacareat fate sfercaet | oferce afer stat: %2 1 afer
fara, acafaninast ge ¢ 1 [waned graurjaerart a,
qeifnd yy, muTeqarragiqn, ger AG fare zo |
[ fatiaer ] & afaae vsfatina 92, aecremgaa? 30 | ua
TATAT: |
aaaarg [vt |" ada aisaq || Ro Uy

[ wreeaAR |
aT PTAT ATTA TATE —

aad Aelaaat afeattargeaat zy
TIARA Te Kamaraadaeat tl ze I

aaq— 1. Ez 2. B.C, mearat 7
eqreqr—1, A.D. E. am 2, A. B.C. add here af
3, A.D. E. om, one waHa} 4. A. B.C, gala

5. This gatha, the text of which is corrupt, conveys the
following sense :

erqyg a, At TAG: A TAT A aA: TeTT 1
fagtia atleata aad a fafta acat in
6. B. am 7. A.C, add g; D. 4 afe: aemreata
8. All mss. read afa for 74 9. E, faarea:
10. A.B. C.D. E. read gut: for 44a
ll, A, D.E. at: and B.C, at aa
Mido Wie Ye

--- Page 251 ---
q¥o aiforeraa [ afar

waa, ga | fantafaat, val agit wTuasftga FaT-
qgfa afedinfaacy, aaettanatatiandearacata | waqg-
aameat gaifafase: saaer: 1 gaat fadtafaathanareaa
qieqaa, ate graft faatrrat carat, aasqatafaazaa erg |
afeaq facitafaat waa’ FAcTg—afaaa a aeatata: alsa: FA
qfaatia | agetafaat, ogatancaifaat agatafaaey 1 at ala
am: sfaaiaraataatraraa: Tee BUT 1 meme, TATE TT
(aeqeat | afataae:, at TAAL | aut feet, eqtatt: feat,
taainer arat fgatratat | adtaedt adlara usasay aelaeay |
wate: afaaren:, Tsar arfa | Prat —azat ge: Greaa feaat Tat,
[wea:] qeareafeaaartr aegis, Tatecuafaca fata
faa | caaeargetaatita:, aTeT SiaeAAEaAsTT HITT
aint afasadiia aaiifeaatita art fgad,  aeHrararra®
aatafeat vin: 1 aa auiTe aI — aataitasa wea feat
awa, aaisaa faatataata fafafa fatar afeat ar ae
ara are: Maa aISATA:, aTfas AAT Toa: Late eafercatiaara
qrat aufasy— ate oer afearfa’ agegenfacierd, Tar
iamaaaieata: ar qaaiea’ aerrgaiarat we faa
faatanacataa 1 vad at aafecdt aallasenraataat wad: |
aq aanfa: qeaaafassd, geedlageatanfaeder wed Tat
qamat sfaaashaareaad , waTlAndfaaterastaaeacaea |
wal GATAATATa Tal waaeaar wlacfaMrngaafaser AIT,
gene afarlaaageantfgs aaeat Ta | TaISTT TARTOT
aiaafaten attaa ofhertss eraead car agatafarer fatatae
afzar weaet 1 athaea aeegenacar ag autmaq— afe gear
egeqfaadead, aifrtteatta: fatefa 1 aed aiteray TATE
agate saaguad e4 ed sfercad 1 arate GTfeadt TEHTgAA-
emaqtiad | ust feairararadiaeat waa: | Maar s atatt aaa

 

sareat—l. BE. faat aqetancaifaataat 2 D. E. om. aa
3. E, axaraa 4. A. B.C, om. afa
5, A. B.C. om. afeatfa:
6. A.B. C. agatmeamafe-gap-ae4
7. A.B. C. om, ar afcatefa 8 A.D. EB, aeart
9, A. B.C, wara gla; E a afe

10. C. om, aaT to Waa, next page, first line.

--- Page 252 ---
xette: 29]

TYTSTTAT 924

WaAeTATAT AT HA | TeAe HHleafa: wafers TAI

afa |

agatewat and xfaciaigeteadt: |
aferdita aiseqa wtafarerrageaat
faatfasteaat sret alfitat ase: |
MAATAGSTEMA ETA: BA: A TAT
anfacaradt gaat gatarater afzar
aetna qataaavarngisaead i
[aeTarentay , ¢. ¥¢-49 |

*qarararaeT—
TreaMAfafatage Tate Tat we ferafeafat TTT |
ada gaacizat ufafararcet sat aa anatafaeagg |

[ maraTencay , ¥. &¥ |

ataaniraseqaaaa:—

aed aaa Talat anaM feAaa |
weet ZEA TGA Ways ATT WIT ul
HAAR SS wavaram aaa Tass |
ated aq: feat wtargaarers 1 7

rata :—aaaitsferaen [afa:| 2, censararrege: [wh] ¢,
aattaatafaaey qs |

‘aun — gaatifaart: 931 aaa faetafaazer anTasT
faaat:* ¢, feagaratsa yf 1

aqalataatieert:—

TAMA arfa att TET faade atest ares

warfeaarret PT ATTA Tar? ala
weet fagonfa aateacged a alaarfit get: 1

 

eared. - 1,
2.
3
3

Ghat sat arat feat sia ager Ba

Mss. read facavrat

E. om, gat to eilfeaafirasfa, 4 lines below.

E. om. ty to faater art, same line, 4. EF, asafaqar:
A. B. C, D, defective : quq:set ; E war for aar

--- Page 253 ---
VR nfrant [ «ferere

Fara: — aavisferaea aia: 3, frawrngesfesaea aft: 3,
agaafaat ey |

_ ee vaatifafare: §, ageatefraey ey 1 ae ofa
faagor wine fara? 2c, feaerTMET F821

[ gaara: ]
earl gerarerfranfadae | raraigaray—

atrerrantet fFargaramaa |
Rearend alaaameat fray tl 32 Il
aysaigaagMyeMad AW |
afremseae syembraagay | 33 |

ufearaarrert fara ot aro: | srfirara ger atsaafiarm: |
afraraaeay ammarcea, afrerrarrare: 1 oe afraraarTeiee
forara faasifeers: | Sacre —sarraagite | Harerwraay | asa
afer satsary, eo ag wt Peat TeeTt wae TWETTAA,
satacaaaeas: | oy aE Tee TAT ToqeTaggT | afer,
ragfaymitcas: | aa ge: cqafaya: feat ? ga uf: Sa afore
faemoreat sfetcr fates at mea Ut: Gs ATT aTeaatfe |
warae ferry aay fara fratg mteafaf atsarafaedare
SqTeATAT |

wa TeeTty geatf Tareqageyrey,’ ufazares:, orawasd
2 Hea we: | aasefeainay , aecfeaaat afar safeerfadfora: |
area, Tee feat ofearersat afer: | wa yal ya: art
aiaq saaftaaritafafa’ 1 srastaniaa ten, Baraca qea¢d Ia
wifst we, dt sass qanfraHao fscequaigqaaaes

 

qt | afemagequy, afrara=aea’ weatay | fata,

eureat—1. E. om. @ty to AIT, next line.
2. EF. aeafeaar: 3. B. #4 for am
4. All mss. read Tatfat wearea 5, BC oma
6. B. aarafafa ; C. antcafafer
7. <A. B.C. &@a-gap-ara, same line.

--- Page 254 ---
weet 32-33 | STE THT: qar

eae, wt ageat | afemmgaq, afsatin = gay
afaamgay | waged wafi— sarmesearfat Foy afer
seearaeaa framed Tears Seatatsazifatatt ter |

Ua araHsHra sgreata: | farwmggMrasquta aeale |
TeIMTH:—
qvefate xd F <a ga aan |
aafrena a ofafaneat aa et ase a
Fare: — q 2
x 9
HUTA HHI TA vo, BATIBVVAAT SAHA Y, vfs
wa st 2 assay wed ufafeada afa: Hecay) at
[safejafa. 1 cafe: eqaareat sfrear ceafe: gg ant
area sear ata: FST MATHS THA 9, MTA o | TET EATTAT
3 | Jealrqaeqreraarg wate am | BTTEScaTfHs aT x,
aframegta acata gird waa qv, afeara[ 2 afeay qe)
vate feeder 1 wate ofa: wafrnit feaarr: warm,
acafagaa =fz |
saaaH:—
graufa: asata: aaa! @ a GAaat ez: |
watanenad: wtsat UirTaas: We
Sata: — % 8
48 4
KURA ‘ofraraaTat faragaaaena sat seat

aa, wal gram. Uda: TeTHaa Teas, Gataaa, Tage
ao aa:qsa 1 aa afta: aatft cari ae ufe: Fa gtr:

 

aqiet—1. E. om. ata: to #<74, two lines below.

2, A. B.C. om. %aq to afta am, next line; E. om.
TIA to FTITAT | same line.
E, om. #aa@ to gaq, next line.

4, B.C. om, atarm:

5. E, om. ata: to amare efa, two lines below.

--- Page 255 ---
qty afer [ sfrero

wreraaat sofas wate: Ys we seat aed eT agqTe
aft: 1 at qaasereareat erararaq | winaed a eqgafatd
werrat eaarearey: | Sersafeypfirraeaghy aaa AAT Ae qo |
uaea GaTaTseaiae aay afrarassaye’ wd 290, ‘afratz-
ya fees’ arsey 39 |
qe: —
avai: ary: ager.” alice aafate
acafatetatset frreaat at wari: 1 2 0

are: — y q
a a)
aura—? ¢. wea: getart [ast] ed 4, ofser
aman | wa Bearrearay wrTare sft earqar 22 3 if wat:
qaaccreat aft: oy | wa ufaccenfaait fara: Tara:, tafa-
wager:, aafytata Zia
VaeaF:—
zur: seqaeaztara: Asafa cfer:
acatata a ysl az wits Hwa TH HY UI

‘aTT— 1 4 YF YF 4 6
2 = FY RX &

qazaarstaara cia: teeta: | ase qdaarfasarery
304 1) WEF ATHSTHTIA SaTEATeT: |

 

wareqt—1. D. E. 5a STAGSsT 2, ALB. Cant aga
3. E.om. aa:to awa = § 4. E. om. earvar 32 3
5. A. D.E. om. eff
6. E. om. ava and the numbers following.
7. E. adds here another uddesaka, but gives no solution :
FMA: FIR FIR ATH THAT: CATT |
aisd dearafa: satfatrtaars ay zag Aart

--- Page 256 ---
weet 22-23 ] faragerert: qay
[ faramerere: ]

Sam T lea ge fraTRsated eareqreaay: | afeemammer
foreng sracafeeas: | Peag—seemetn aT aSeI, sas
THT TAA, BUT FIT MAGA T SAT AMTVNTe:, FI HALT ATT-
ar, wradaiaeas: | adafaafa: safaccadta | a ater
svafaa: atta aisaiscaqadata: 1 wafmanameay F494 ATTETA-
stafaaetia arsaisrqadaa fa? aesararfastarq 1 gaat
ara UT:, HIafaaer aTTaTeearqTafadda asta afraegtafa, ar
aafataicaaata: arafaar: fear: 1 wera WiTarceary saat
GAT arTaAT qisaearadrataeaaa | Fa: ? arrarearsaaAt:
weatfeard 1 war egal’ ofeqsacafaegat azarae gfe
Asad | glaswamercaenfen widaestateala—acataaat-
aiTaIeasaaT: HEAT Se | Rarweawaad, AVTSITATSTaT: FETT:
waalafa 1 atagna gctaq qa TATA | Mae fecay, aT TET,
ATEAATTATI Fees 1 Takao azeat-
rat wfrearals at mee UN: BS wt aTeadifar 1 aasafeafna
RAAT RATT TAT THA | Faagawiad fay, TraTTATTEIT-
gatas: | Ezra wadifa arzaira: 3 satel afar: | atrartr
are: [st], salerferatsrrfaar aise: 1 afascqqr—

safe @ atagite wad fe TAT

eeaatiaat wea 1 NT gerareamasd waa’ sf 1 afren-
saaqay gearfe a’ frcaggrareg [saqsat] |

aT STITH: —

weal Sareaea: TeeagTT gateaatanta: |
Wa: Ys WET BY porate: fea | ay at

 

saremt—1. A. B.C. faqaaat for qaat 2, D. E. om. aft
3. D, earatit ; E. eararfa
A. B.C, gap for agTara

A. B.C. D. E. aafa for aaa:

4
5. E.om. the sentence, aft? to qetaq

6

7, The Mss. read at & E. om, aur

--- Page 257 ---
qe aforrr’ { «for.

aT — 5 &

93

ATTA, ATTYEATIAM, WAAL TS I

HUTA FISTATANTLeAM STTTAIaAy” ,§ “MAITETTATH’-
fafa srt i | Teeqerearey 2 Afeqoraateat farce’ rear
uf: Fat gira: weeothit where great ys at areata afas 2,
aeat afta AAT S| UaTSRTATA fo ase WTATSHA y |
Waeast TATRAT

KP POD

‘gasoterinarcagian fe aay 3301 Sarmyearfsct
ae'fafa satal =aeafaa |arrarearsaare carftaq § | ae
HIT ATA F

JeeTH:.—

water ha gaifeancfgared garieafaweat |
qq: Yanria wet quae aA af usu
raTy— = 14
RR
[faa | tigareaset ga atotat Hstarc aTasT TIS |

[ agReare:, nogetafafy: |

aerartt waning Hered atsaat— xfaaror: Fa gferar
mesargats yfetaat Ye at aafefa <faunor yferares
saremi—1. E. om. ata: 4 *
2. For the remaining solution of this uddesaka, D. reads:
wag 65, aatnawia asal qos} ¥, 1 oe aaTirashe
RTI asa:
3. E. gives this statement a twist to the effect that Ku(akara
‘could’ be used in grahaganita also : wa aenafraste
G_IFILT Alsa:, and omits the succeeding demonstrative
examples of kutfakara based on grahaganita,

--- Page 258 ---
veiteh 22-22 ] cegetere: ae

HAT guositeacs | aTAAARGars TET aTsat | ATTA
sae: TSqaccfamahy wxoo 1 aaatrafadt 24.42! | VaT-
qaI STATA AT | TTA ATA wMeHTWeY FETHIT: ATET: |
JEANF:—

wed Ty  aqteersd

qe war faantiaamrarmara |

aiaeqet fare wemcafatat

Tare aea aa: Sfeerafage 1

ata:— [weraf:] ¥ 1 25 1 20 1

qaarr wage: [aftto, 3c] af AosataaTTT
aTaat— afaaret facctaca May se 00 | UAT 240358 afr
gargerit [24g0o] wad,’ wet AUsaAMTA ceecs | sae
AIST ITAMTTS Themecy Herre: FRAT
[=ara: | — BSR AMAA sees
RYOR58
meet FETHIVATAAT—
SWoVoORGATY
ABWHRRS
SATA SITALSA ATTY —
[ JouRyy |
R os
[ase] caenfraray, wetret— qo¥Rvy |

AAI CHVUTAIAT HSTHIX HeaTSSAM Hosariy Balser
TAGI— UHITAIAT HSHITATTASAM— Fvgor
RUS

ara Hosa FT Suita — qetHET aA BeHTT:

asaya featfafa eara:— 9, <vgqor, seas l Wa weet

 

eareat—1. B.C. D. waa 2. A.D. 3a; B.C, Be:

ade ae Ye

--- Page 259 ---
4a referred [ fue

‘fazafrafaqataraeraaneiT: Gafafaa war | ASMTAAT THEATT-
qa wigs, Tusa fHafefa -aTA:— 4, WAS, SRRSS |
ga aed faccafaamecttanadt Io aesaria qafafaareas |

[ aosancaeafate: |
gaat frcrafaaamercarsacan [AvsaTeaer | [ators]?
qfeaecy parare: Peart | TTT
aeaed TAISSHET NAACATE. BAT Wa
afsanarg aaa afid sta car Fafa |
gars Kerattt afer aatfor aati &
agi ara aT: a aa feed aved weet TAA Ns
ae: — aeaee tlantT—

q
vo

WAT VSAM TATU ATE’ gfe AteaaTer
923004 | aATTATATAT Taaagin: slats A qoXsvy |
aac
UBENTIAT HETHTU ATA FT *SSs 1 qaatadaria
gfe wREtiqaaad Rarer AlTsse aT AVSATTATTAaT
[933009] m: Berar arsed She ase frerafaaarrercarsa-
AFARTAST MN ATTST FT |

ga nearness vate | wal aveaaHaalag |
Ua AVSAHIDTU SATSATT:

[ <fageatere: |
sar g ufsagrare seae | TIA —
IeaTF—

aa Fat: ARTA feaaeq Aa-
a canal feaaufrat aan: |

 

eneu—t!. The term nirapavartita has been used in the sense <f
apavartita,

2, A.B. C.D, at

--- Page 260 ---
yetet 22-33] uifrggrert: ARS
Ra fara avaea a yroferat
ared faateend faacifvared 1 <1

ATT — °

9°

x4
48

HUTA ‘TORT ATT’ xfer UiMAT wary qxxq Ks |
araaacharrn steayT TT eT TATTAT 248552 | faa
quxqes |

Ase HITHITHATTSTM ATA F—

FORUEY

YtToo

araed grenfatarsr aed yer: | AE TTT: 1 a
avo, [v] i warm [qoguey | wear] aaafrelat geaare |
THSUTTAAATLT HSH FAT TST L—

192005
ROY

casas auifraarern ATA ST AF
VORURY

Ysoo
HT TATA |

[ saterate ateafafer: |

aa grataarar efararat a TaTTAaT HeTHTe Hear FTTH
HART | ACATAVSANITET STAM TATE | Ta Tar Waal Avs Ay
a Tae | TTT

ate: — qX
RYORSS
Wa Ase FSH ATTASA TA — FARR
9

TIGA ANATT |

--- Page 261 ---
qXo afererat [ «fee
[ wiegzzrere: |
HITT Teta; —
AAT TT ATT ATA: AACAT
faaweafoqear faferer: ase geet: |
wa afe farafin afte Sarasa
Tanta farmetiogeret ea 1 qo 1

ala — 6

°

°

y
[war] wrmiry— que
qaaearsaTTy wT &204¥

&IS9R
Ta Gata FerErt Seat surfes fad gather a

Carer: star TTT) TET wargatarfe HETHITATT AS
CANATT 1 TF A— yeas
49999
mat aufata qdacasr vate amasd | wrest
sfemaaread taavsarft uferares aan: qeas, [9a]

at gafeanat frerafaagieaat a pret gear daferka
Ta Uses aaa) area —

[ Fare: |] — Zo
BT ORSR
[sa] Seraret arrest a
904 3
q
mat aula sear ufade Taras —
o¥ievo

q8
aa cba aaorrgitorrrarea falcata ary l

 

atten—1.  C. waiqgaatafa 2. A. D, aaa
3. Mss, read wrt for ufér

--- Page 262 ---
weed 32-23 ] fercenggtere: V4
[ facargzarere: J
ua frcarae gsear gears: fad | aerar—
BRAMH:—
weseeiaafatiaar gat aT [fewer swqraa]
aaat fant faacady qrareranginfefarst: 194401
rata —

Coo 8d

q
qaacaad faftamiter— ayoe

FTA sarerAT afr sy eat

qR¥¥q R00
R4oRaR

‘aa arate wise frasa ase qaifarse eqraae 1 Bqeq
qierarat a agra sear aeredtafeata Rea faaseeg yaa
Te eyTa wre oferta 1 armas waft | aT BATT
TeASIT WTA T | eaTTaT—

FRARVR
O¥IRVE

WITeHy Gaqeyaqyay wansafs wfaainfacarea—

RvR
q
BW
RR
aaa CRIA Herat Heat garfers feat | geqt—
UHI HTH wT TN
sq
SGRGRVY
MI RATATEAT ITT
ne
saeaI— 1. C, Beat
2. B.C. D. hapl. repetition of #4 to tata, three lines
below. ,

--- Page 263 ---
qeR nforam’ [afore

aya ysean aferarat a cHTTAaa HeraTe HeaT WATT
Tafa aearasyaT | Taat— wars seca, yfeqarat
4 HSTHIW WTA F— = oso
34
wa fercaraeruratrareh aieay |

aa ahead qayfesa fraar aie gatafaa: gat wfase-
ata geafa, aud arcer:— frrrafaryfargeaitta, aenriere-
afaayiat: fact: qaearaita waft 1

[ atemzetatz: |

ay afraq qafet qagfeer ga: feaat ata qafet
aafeasaea at agarefead qt ca’ afasadtft qeafe, vaar—
facvataagieny accgaafasty’ aerate: Peat 1 aeaTet at
fafaszeaeata[g|aa’ waareeaa: safe cata agearat
afaeay ud ase Herat frcratadgierrat goareeda girag

frerafaagiaay fafeceqaordtangia sfeca sraferagen:” are
meseeq: | aAAT—
STANT: —
afade: wear: sapfraifeamt
aa aman a fanaragd worafa |
waagequiaad Fa RTA geal
wat qa: saa fard slagqerart wag
gafaaa wa qaqeqas—
RX

Ry
qo

WAT TAT THRU TeTABAT: qooo | Afenereict ga-
are? | re aeraruaaayg | frevafaagfeaag acaqwagg aT: wy

 

aaTeat—1. D. om, TSeaT 2, D. waraaa
3. D. qaqa 4. A.D. tr. of gat
5. C. om. wagaafrey 6. A.B, aearadt; D, aeargaey
7. C, aaferaaea: 8
9, D. qaeq aTy:

D, gat AeaH:

--- Page 264 ---
yeitet 32-33 J artHerere fara: 4x3

sfrafears Beart: waTTAaAT 2, waa facrafaryfarar: afar
AAT: ¥Rowws, wfery Gaasea[ sigs ara: |] #ra:' ~eqows t
wales Herat araqeiad | ast gaacara:? avzuys | gafeand
HITT: © | PART FvORVR’s |

ua aac? eaTarey Jaa HA: HATHIET AST:

[ waugime fara: |

q Bqaay: BeHTe: A az uimarafacaarsgeafy gtsq: |
aaat—

SaeTT:—
a qaan: Target; gTufraTTT
aaa faaantay wieafacan: |
warat fagagfa: fra: ata:
areqisaray s wot fearETVsT 11 93 0
rata: — °

°

R&

HATAAATTM AM PANTIAIT Te TAAL RSTHTTATST-
seit wiTAsaTT $353 1 Ra aITasAAsar fas vata. THAT
HG ofenaaawad caaTTT UT saea waza: |

THSNTTAATT «Heil FCAT WT ATATTAT 42E2IB
aufaaa i maa asangitot ames 4 gaferferke 1 Ta-
AAATAAT AIT BSTHTL AIST:

[ arcagrm®? faire: |

ay afraed qeaia— qaiaanal qafad atafay at ea-
waeert | wal ga: faaat siataaacEeaagq vfacaa eft | wa
Rerarae:— asfeqatia:! qa fawafaayferdiait feaarn
Waa: wereqt Tey va a: | afenrqgena garefe aracel

 

ereat—1. Mss. defective ; TaHsAA'* Te:
2. C. om, qaaa ara: 3. B. aqvafty
4. B.C, om. afeaarter:

--- Page 265 ---
ave arfereret [ afaao
fareerndant fe ame aatawt uit) ga qaea farcataa-
farat att aves anafear were gq. aexearft A4arqadaa
WAT Ay LT: que freatcaterat arafaasresfearar gore: |
o ara fearfgar cai aft rary 939%9392% 1 aeReaTfr qai-
vataafeaetiort aTT 939%83924 1 TAT UfmaT qaqd WE-
RSH AST: | TTIT—
SRM: —

qataeanat gatazat geet aot avant

avigtenfagta a gat qiea ardiad

focarfa: wft-qeraireget sitzer at ga:

Brea wirazer frad grat feafgied: 1

fafaerrfircfaaisait fasted qategfa: |

maaee faarararg fafercar afeaferar: uy u

FqTa:—
[go] [Ho]
& &
4 R
q 38
qv ¥R

AMAATFAACTT:— wYoo |

SUT — Gataeana: fresafsafeaara weary 2
fafasearugaaragal ata:, IaH: ym, qs: MATT Efe waa
hawt aguacarerg sara waar oftaet vy, Tamer y, MATTER © |
qa ga qataexaaifaeaiaaieaarat | gorarer: TraTVg hag
ardlarett sfeter aa

[ KR¥Rse000, RYOVERqRY, VaSRERRNo fazar: |

[ agate gzererz: |
ay afer at agatna Hearsedtoi qeafa weary: —
Pisererrnat aafaaait yferarat arradt gear agar:
HUNT: | TAIT

 

waraar—1. B, om. aan: to fearat, same line,
2. B. 4 for ya 3, A.C, hapl, om. grax

--- Page 266 ---
weiteh 22-33] rawETHtt: avy

SqAMH:—
fameasannrgy: cigedt afnfeareet geet
fava af va wtf a otis aan on qu
aT — 4

y
30

HUTA FSAI: ERowsy2e | [arafearsart = |
{AVES Jokoo | Tat gTeratarasat TaAI— xqurevs

TRVERAIRY
APSAMTT— FVVRRRSR | Ta aed gdaagiot are
ay SUORWRaGE
BVASKER

warTaaarls sche Hea a vast wae ae aeTy |
TaaT—
CHET TATA HEH ATTAT T— yoeeeece
RRESSRY
[ marie aerfrta gata varetot arrest a1 |

Vara TATATIAT Harare: Headta:, wfearafacar-
aerate 1 cata faag-aaracatt faeator aqTeITA |
[ say-Rerrarz: |

ma afeaq ferancsaaggtcamtana afd feta
gfeer feraat fafaaearory qeafa, qeqrayqa:— fafecefafeat
elaarrivarraed Herare asa: | aTzaT—
aetna: —
wigMsramta sam Afeitezretsiraiat: |
fe-faqsa-farar agradt af aveand gare: 4g 0

 

sareq—1. D. aa

2. A. B.C, om. the portion from here to 44%, two lines
below.

3. A.B. C.D. read oftaarfa which makes the verse non-
metrical. : a

Wie Ho 48

--- Page 267 ---
aye rforerer’ { sfnae

eat — 2
V4
y
HUA FMPATIT— VVIQaQy
YRRoooo
udt aafamfafazraiaat— sy909
qaoa00

aosatafaay Roxx? 1 weet CaHuaatawT: |54¥2,
BERRY? I
varqaaarte gerart Heart aurea T TT ATT: | AIA —
THTTATT HATHA ATTAS A— Yo Zoy
RR RF
TaAavAgalT Walsaty |

aaa veqfesa aerated [geafe aa lift arrercarsaafe-
HOTAT RITHTL: BETA: |

gq  qusaqftaarkanraraeraraarqareaToala esas
ase [ugar aa cearrafearafactiva geet, aati
agaraareaga: — awry ears aye fafgce-
ameaerraca Zerarefatafeta 1 TaraT—

qa eH: —
eheainsrdntresrger get
asifaarafancigafze ges |
qay aafag seater areata
ared fearg aa ven famagd 1119 0

rOTq: — °
3

v
zo

eqreat— I. B.C. om. the figures. 2, D. om. qeat
3, Mss. read amar for ¥ Tar

 

--- Page 268 ---
vettet 32-33 ] AaTRTIEre: q¥o

eema— [qear:| qaqgaaqiraqaamt: aarsafaa
Pera Ta ars Brat qsXo
SGRoI0o00o0
TTATAT: FRoXeXooo | Aad qyata| facar: 7s | wT
wesseyooo, [zon] | far: Gausaqwaat avgarfa cerat
wrat fearcarra qaeT RENE
3

°
°

warraaay Herre Heat artifaHa Tata Teag | TaAT—
VHTTAAATT RTH ATTAS T-—- 4 RY0UWRRZ
XRG

wa earfaaaeahy ss z |

[ aar-mezrerz: |

ma Faye: | aha geqerarerraqararaita seVT
fara qsgfa, TeaTaATATAT: — sseareasyerirarearaiaa-
gqferary Beat Yaa HETHTM Pasay _eeHreaqzyearatseAT: |
Tz
TaeTH:—
wreaerareaafre fraaer wed-
teal amdafediszagenana: |
faenfanmaaaizaaa gr:
wist faarfa wantva aarastag 1 46H

aa — g
4%

RR
Yo

aura wermagqauita eft aah frecafrafearat
grant gfe aquits awash eaTAT 44 EE | AUSeTaT

 

saTeaT——_ 1. A.B, om. FT to Terai, next line.
2,3. D. warqaatarty

--- Page 269 ---
qe aforarara [ feo

qegneg | wea geaq Beat: [voog] | wea agataragin:
[qx] |
VARTA SeeTH:—
HEAT SPY Hera graze earn TTT
amagiaedtat santas faega: aa ca
eat fecargaet qufaag eq: ere cargeifa:
wist areal wotset wfergaainaly qosefaga weary Ishi

ata: — Vss[xeqgoo] MIA FoR
BASS
WANTIAT FATTTTATCATTA— «FAR
waa Cataqsaefrartaca:— 4
“
42

CHITA! BSTHTR TATE T LALLY ares afer
qattasetnt wired a avsarfe [qaleata] |
meatier SeeTs: —
[asa wosenat w jaarragdaitaiages
Hea Bae Wat: Teach RalaaratTgaey |
ae area avisgi TaTeT[ wat ash wre] fag:
ggtariaant fafraafardt aa aateasta: Wo tt
[ aNe
RVORSS
waa Asai Gada ase [HeTHIT] wrasse F
23a, HeTareeT ATAAPTT: 89° |
x

ate — | HOSANITT VYVGKO |

aaren—l. A. B.C, ggrareed for Herat: 1 ATT
2 ALB, C.D, agatar
3. Raghunatharaja reads #faanqaat
4. D. waraatt 5, A. B. C.D. 28&eee
6 A. B.C. D. ¥axes

--- Page 270 ---
wet 32-22 | aaqafeatrtoy REET: q¥e
UHTATT RITHTIT ATTA F q¢509%1 Hat sefes
qaaeinayay | 4d
qa + aragadastiaarisararersafy aarayt Zaar Herarey
faseqdia: | aaat—
TRAMF: —
aretiw: fraatiecegafaenaat anata.
ferrnigtineienisa fara aeatseat ger |
qe: wafatneraga We: Karat Aart
aatea aT Tare afag: casera at anfest: 1 270
fercaarg:? 64 1

awry — aataaeaarry wear aeTadaT | WeTT
graeme oSq | oarataacfaarrat sramatarseqcarteng
wafrtfearta [at a] aye cargat—
vs[x2qgoo] ATA oq[ xy]
JOUISTH

[aq TalarTadst Hear TATTAI— oes eo Ho 99 |
RYORSZ

TAAHIIAL HPA ASASZTA:— Qo, ASA: 3 1

carats — q
44
qs
vq
CHTTATATATT HSH AAMAS A— yrs?
AX0FF
gaa sufrparetot ATs T |

[ wagaiaatan aerate: |

ma gax[alrafaaata wagizsareia art a Tafa, TeaT-
HAMANN: | AMTSITATSATATNT AAT ATA SAT TTA | -HCAT

aqret—1, A.C. D. arse 2. A. B.C. om. facaratg:

--- Page 271 ---
qXo erferererr’ [ afro

qdaq agree: Pera wa gatnfe amercarsararin Bea Far-
wat 7 TasaT ser qaaagtas:, Tredat uafata

aTeeAT 7 TAT AT
SIATF:—
weanaaa: Matfafiear faancaesatecrferargeat |
afagannrmeratfenert aq aor faarcfeaorenfs ut 22 1

21g — ¥YZ2Ro000 WIF— srYoo
TAGS Yokoo
Ue WaT SrHrraafacrae Hetateorara cfaara-
— 18ERR
aosartt 4 wey |

[ suunzermniciara: |
aq afeaa [fel-gemeaaa waaay wena
wareat gzuafa, aeareay‘faarrarret farafecata feseerar-
TATA |
TqaMH:—
asigreaatuges: sfrafearat ron
aedl? [aa a afr] aa a aat: Rat war aferat |
at at weaatisarea gaat fad: ea: sae
ware aearcita[ aera are aatfen Jeo:
weeaernfsaaminfar: da: gredteat
Fae aR scraitahe crate TSATyTA: |
gareai gual eafingaeteet] rat aera
gaa arte aattaron qa saTaaed HATA 88
aa: — WHET RSVR
AVA eq soFVy

sareqy—1, A, B,C. D. aera for Tea 7
2. BC, wet 3. A.B. C. aqaa

--- Page 272 ---
vettet 82-23 |] werfaat rampereré: axa
Gareat Hosea gay qea gao BAT Keay
FATT Asal, AKT 5533, AMET gyoooo | VAIFATAUIFaT
‘aherarrairart farergaraarrarter cata azrar<: FRAT |
TAT A FATT:—

[ Hea | 55RR [ wre | E¥oooa
R19358 FEVER IIE

WAAR — F3919R0
UTA: BAMFAUTMAIT VGoRas WIAA Hear eqrqar—

4 2
BRK

Wa oaraese CaedT aa cs uls: gear gaat wf
favtarg aqrearad | aa a Fara: 91 wa BT frat, wader
ufa: Sa qfratsarat dere [werafaatt gt] ad ari
saseeti asett uferedtfor wari 1 ea farteacrferatia®
meandtaait gt Ae: aerarefean: Jarfrataessa yfrat aa:
qsex 1 aAatfrarasgatst 939%3392% gfe. afretagat
farsara cord aufsgrtaalsaqyaacatertartr, reef
FATA: VVERYORWR RON | HF Ufalgsaara: | WIAA Barty ag
agian faaart fesgatraat: reat sfrcad: feeserrafereai
ag agar fassarraaay’ | wat agente cafsareqgensle |

[ wearfael guaqezrare: |
Re Rees:
weaBAATNTaT aaa: Hat water w-
susdvafeapatferagqaafeagera: atta: |
waremfafamene: gfagat: aren agar a
TUG aTeareiT: By aaa AeTMAT: 1 Vv 1

 

emeat—1. A.B. D. om. one Tae 2. B. om, "AT

3. A.B. om. fardeauferststa 4. B.C, aax

--- Page 273 ---
4xr arforererva [ stone

PATA —  ARRYORVEUSY LA:
BRIS TRIKE
GRZZ000000 ArKeT
BOVVSQRaAo0o00
HUA Aosqeverse | Tt ATTST AMR TT TT A
gasafra | TataqyaTh: [ Rogge | aIae FATTAT | ORGY
waerafaat <fanear 2¥oR 258 | AATAIT Yaoooo | WATKAT
ATalad seso%? |

waerafaaarrarcraeacefinha: HRSTEAAT TET uit:
qraarfegen teatime gaa, MST BEURIORE PHA
saeafad aefafe | aa cUfMSATTERAATAT Ysoooo | AAd:
aay [gove| | [za] Stor irarasHar [st og gss| Thora
ATA: AAT TAT SSA a CST VAATTT:, HSU sgysgagrve |
ae ufacqadtaat [20gay afrdt ata: afeaeqafaya-
VETS TIT ATA HaT AMAT: TST FSRROVEI ASAE |
manatee = gat [ fraaeraar |feaaquataryrgatratga:,
HST qsyvqegiqsvocos | Wa wfatereara: | Wea
fea: aarrafea[axeaat att ga lsat avad | eat GA:
aqeara ater aTaday 2 ea Heaaugrad GHearay
mato THT: AHEATaTsaT ATTSTT fa aaearat yfearat
aradaa fasaracfafaaeactat apeata: ware farrearcerartia-
WYWHST:, AHTT FRQRWOY | yfareatsta WuUfsqaaTaeas:,
mS qorey | wat yferasea Tar TATeT ETT qfnat, aero
qafaaaneareataer aie | waleat | qafafaaferqarazta-
qafacanenatadat gra: caurmrerereat fast weet qai-
aqaalaiaaTt: 1 Ta: 8QRR, FRAT vow | AAA
aet aativeatrat aarstor fafeset wae: 1 afenaa fazaata
aaatraaacaat fraat werner: cafaearemaatgiore:, agxtt
q3Rooo00 |

BqAITH:—

wautentafafasae afoat Fat watat Fala
gugraftafneiguianantgaraatced ta: |

sarqat—1. A. B. C.D. add after this, the number 3¢¥&X4sF5R

2 D. om, went

 

--- Page 274 ---
gatet 22-33 ] wearfaal TAUMHETETT: aX

SENYAAUSAT: PATA TeATAT: YSAHT
areareagtamiad feat gag a areagt agt: 1 BW Wt

FATT — TA: FEYMORULYKR
VRSSOS IRIE
MEITIT V¥RSeVWoooo
BYVYRRoooo
AA BSTHIET ZITCAHTeagGawseard TR TTR FET-
wity qalaararsarraraa aay =| caeeerearafraraarraé
faeraigaaarTay aay BATTISTI | TTAT— za: Arar
glearaiadt Tefa:— IOUS RAR
SR SBRIAGRI

CarearagalaaTT ATTA HTATUA Is | TA ATTAT FTA
TST MIM T TA TTA TST ATT Fear Vafercat wegea, farcar-
wesafafesat | afafeaa ug add faxaa-— fee. Fa gfrar
facaitisartiarraiaataigi gs at seats 1 wa wre
STATAT | TFT C3093 S0rx4 | Waa Slee: Fa har cHaaetay
gefacqaiaaarrertT gat Ys wrt sreqeatit cHrqaaaHsrHi<-
acarta da waa facia a 1 waTaTTaaaT Hearth
WTA F— 54RVRosvoo ,
[xs]

aaa getaren gafafedt araget aad aa: gaze aa
arma fara a gare: feat fana Fat gforar area
[ata] osfarrafararmeres ge at areadtfe usa
BTATT | FT WYYoRZWERRo | UF Gaara Ferare: Prag
gram Fa qirar ufsaeastia aaa ssfarafaaarrgesy Ya
MIT seas AosANMG BIAVAT | A T RWBYowrose | Wa-
avatraamarearsareqigqerey fe ocsfating, smptaeatetas-
arsata wacifa a: gaffer va warrrata [eetarey | arterset
T oHoo@sAgyell aaa: Tay Taq ufarafacaraaary |

[ia]

eqiaat—1. A.C. ayaddla; B.D. gadata = 2. A.B.C_D. om. 34

3. A. B.C. wpok@eRyg
Ute Wo Qe

 

--- Page 275 ---
que ferret [ afertto

od aexearts Meare BATAATT HrasSvaA TAIT ITT
TATTA—_  ARRS
RESR

Areat AT HETHIT: GSAT | WaT T AMAG Tea, FF
AAAI il THTAAAATs Herat Arpase FS} 1 gale ara
waraaag fama we Heats Seat ufMAa AAT! TA Fo |
uaqaaaahe HerHet wes TS 1 aa: gree tress
AGATA TEMA A HAKIL HAT AVSATG Ae, TF WqVoY |
CHITA HHT wTTATsH TIS

qa aaa ASAT TasetaendaTgatindaead: sMy-
qraangernnsran wate aaxeagaaisa: sacar’ Rafe
qafafeat waz 1

va? qUsaael quiaraeara ‘sfrerrarert fera-
TIME at Gea TTHsaagines qafafea CT |
agar atsel qanvsanrafaassat woe: sara ghors:
earerrametonrgdt sai fafgatacnarercfaktera e& fafarca[ a
ea luge? a afne: qatvxadt: gaa gaafafeatacarars-
ayia waqelaaimgraeamied GIR Ys WT saeqTAa
eget Ha gaiaanal: gay qanavsenfl gativsaiteusit
aq aaa | aif nosaift weeaRgum + Gafafat Ts I

[ seufadt sammzernre: |
ud camagrarcstt farses | TaraTt—
FEIT —
Reativinaazeed qaifercieat
crargifeafaarEengagay: ie: Tyat ATER: |

qraiceatypuaatnd taifazalss
wpimaatagraaat: Hey tear

 

eneat—1. C. hapl. om. of
2, A. B.C. D. fafaxa- gap -1e 7: 3. C.D, are

--- Page 276 ---
atvet 22-33 J wenfaal somggrett: qu

latarenfenretacahiey aergacazeet
aragtafiagefiraa: ceaifroraraay |
eaureinavsatia fafira[g arenfa] acageqar
Rererefataaar wera Tel HATT VEU
aT — .

Tr PROVERXRYA ROR
BWOVRBBRVEAWH AY o

PICT QUWOB<VVVZoVoo
BUZBOGRRRoo0 00

TI: REVTREKLSVOXY¥00
USORVNF WY YSXO 00

maaan [tfaaeatlaateat ealariatagrascrges waae-
qatfrwareamay:, PEAT ZowoyyeqqEessszo |

[arraraar ot =—|- ear yUcanagaaaaagiacadaT ,
MSht qeqrsrygo | Maatalad ~ararserfracarcauisaaar:,
HS Brokat; BRT yaurausafaretrar:, reErlt
YSoooos AUFATHIAATT YARRERG |

CATFATATHATATTSITATA TAA ATATALT | HITHTC | AST
TAU HRUAT HAA AATMAT:, AETT BoRoggyogy | WaT
qaraeaaqrqaladarsya: aa Tafasa: eawrMI ASAT: Rog | Wa
qvafaarfaararme fra: yard Yargranagaa-
vanaegh: [afrat] afrarter gat oret feeder: yeareac-
afafaaefaqararracaUegagwMrargr exer, TET
Foss eoQpooureyszovoo | A farsaraea TaeAaIgT ug
et Peart fraaeisaaateea: Bar wahe TATaeg
gianerfacarizsa fan wpireragalageacetta cay aca ATE,
WSULT —- FATA FESS oT OWRORVOERKYT FYooo00 |
Ha TaaTA ASA aT ATGAeT MITTS TETRA MEAT | Tag Ya

eren—i. B.D, eara(D. vat)daraferaa
2. A.B. C.D. afacazarz
3. A.B.C.D. wt, ace. to the vakya (vide last footnote).
4. C. aq for TF. os

--- Page 277 ---
axe

afererart [ ferro

gerere fe qdéfrerad ferternt eat acyifafarta 1 aa
qT HAMAD AAA ASH eT SAAT HTM aera eT eM aNTHATTT -
ABTSTATATT: FAVRIVKURAS¥o | MsaHsTT: TrageITAThz-
Farag: 4ReFqS¥ I

"cana HeTHrefa fata haraaratl aelefanaarcraasaa afer

facead |

[ werqada wearereasd) |

"Ta TERTIATI: wHSTAaeaet | TAA —

wreefeadey aTERTAATT |
wargeafeaegeeaa ews AA: 117
Fe ware Tea anonfzea: |
fafaraa sara afgai® stad gat 2

[ qaea |
faratah [dae | avitcarferrar: [8¥ G08 ]
Ree wad wager: [2X8] |
uilat aqand got: fanra [992005]
aa: cargiaiaasumaseat [yoy] ue pu
wrafrarraada[ ysswz ]anTReT
weet [sa uz ]faargeaer: [49099] shaver: t
aeaitshtaraeta wT | 61 gro [Sa
ergzaqatigeamaa: [¥seaxea] uu ¥

 

A. ae oo aiaaaaeare ; B. AeaTE | C. THE
E. commences again after the long om. from p. 136, above.

E. begins another om., extending to the end of the
Ganitapada, p. 171, line 14.

A.B. C.D. hapl. add 3q2aa:

Mss. read fafa: for faat

A, B.C, D. at for 744

A. waeraatfadt ar; B.C. D, waeraat fart ar

--- Page 278 ---
eeite: 82-33 ] ATLA —aereT ques

saTeaI—1,
3.
4.
6.

gatfrcsracaeg’ [fo¢eq] fafa faarat

aSarara] TURITAASA TEA |

wMtainGerpaaronyot fares H-

aratiea[ 2G 33NK3 9 JASMIN FET A ATTA
aaatn[ afateamfaed qyvone ala qorereqatea |
eran sans fa ferafaaafia[3 oo QQ R09 %R q RIT i |
*aslanfasta freer ¢¥ Rg Jaartagen

fa: [secqeaal] guatcafin: |

wlan wera qareIM gea-

aalefermazaa: [4 20%SRI31¥R4 | GA Ta TaN 1 9

us wa wyatt faacaa: 1
sacaaaanr[ aa] arratangtaa: [eyoo] ncn

[ aeneq ]
sracisa[ art: ]* ease
aeaTMAAITeATIZT: [9Esrs] 1
asauifafraat eqafeaa:
EufanaTags: [WRI] usu
uifadtsie wazRarcat
sarAaarTateatt [Roo Ve] Tr: |
aa eedfraat fanaa’
ezafazararant: [596279] Udon
werainmatferaret [3¥0924]
METAR Tata: |
AAMIALTG TH SAT:
amurgiagra [yvoqyuy] were: 14990

B.C. D. unifstacateg 2. A.B. D. ¥fT
C. gap. for VE to W4:, next line.

A. B.C. D. aitacianaet: 5. C. fawecae
A. B.C. araifit 3D. aaaifz

--- Page 279 ---
qux

aforarata [ afore

anratafaraze [29945 Jaferad

fafa farmer vlcaa

aang frases

1Paqeadtsa qqeR6998] aia TTA ATH
Sefarazaea] 1¢98% Jafead

Markafanaagga: |

AASITTTT SATS

qaazeAAT” [VRRISITY | TT EMA: ATM
aaty afaqaazarr [&415]

fafanfia qoerwageaat |

PAATT ATABSAT-
ENAAMATAATA | TSAR SST ARO [SAT VS Ut
aearg avara atfaar

wanreanear: [3293] wag 1
Bray TP TTAT TT

‘qagzsfafaacafarmar: [8S ygyyyonad) ugg ul
amarmer Tata: oa [x] ea [x] a aes
Be: Fea: aMza Tata [or ]aahaa: ua

[ water |
aealaaaTway’  TATSE-
maaceratz[ ose guces |AaaTAsea: |
‘gegeg[ wea qnatsa] WawgeE:
‘araryceanaAaae [R2VWIWLA] Aaa YSU

 

 

eqieat—1.
2.

AA Pw

A. B.C. D, ataatsa

A, B.C, Yargyay

A. B. qaqaagan ; C. qaarge 5 D. YaIGeary
A.B. C. Farge 5. AB. C. aig
A. B.C. D. ageaa8z -gap- Wah

B.D. wag; C. Hg

--- Page 280 ---
eatet 22-233 ] STH —aeNsaey ays

aati [zatfraarat aFez-]?

GzH[ FVVORRAY [TAIT TO ETTTTAT: A
*aadisiztarfaatfzaaer [220230]

Ulaaatesy faterata: ds

AAAI TAT AaCT-

staaciea| qaQ quay | WRATH:
Satereataftagarg qa -

sttaigzat [2992823] mina weer: 99h
facraat zeaaatfzatt-

Mara] yougc gz |sfeay Torareerfet: |
ARAN AAA A-

alerfia[ 2298020 lazer: Bfadisa Ae Yon
fafaftasar. afsacraea-

aotaer: [93209] eqavarcareat 1

alatg feearpargaar

aaifaat [28359083] anata asa 1 87

AAT TatateMAra’ | 93 9G] -

weenaaasa fe acatteaq’)
amaarakarnysr-

adtarmarnifearatea [224G09988K] FT: UU
waea[ tar: ] | wereitsfeerster-
araguzteg[ 1g 8so% ARMAS: 1

Hea TENTS Atay

qaqeafranfeaar [ RxRIyoqsqg] u Wu

 

weat—1,
2.

3
4.
6

A.C. D, waret (C. 7) aa08g

A. B.C. D. wealfa for wedtsfe

A. ay for Ht; B.C. D. ae for Ha

D. arg 5. D, earqzat
A. B.C. ataraaea 7 Cy meatier:

--- Page 281 ---
ako afererert [ afte

trearetat sat[ za Bar: eect aateag] 1
tam [qa jraaa: aay] [ya x aaa]*® aeaea nen

[ ataqiaea ]
ecatfraare alga
ware [&XG0R4os aed JURTTATE:
[sare Tata] wig arTE
Sgareagratfarasart:! [<2] uw Wat
tataaanfers gras.
Sqpaged [99xxg3¥oq] saat asa: 1
fafegrgeariea am aarra [20¥%093 ]
amt[sa] ufsmmaerga: nee
mMatraangearga-
gemteaat [23Q¥3 oq] JrRtAt: 1
fentgrargataaat [9242699]
ATMS WITRAASVTG GA 1 Yo
adqafeargasaaar: [¥1e454¥5]
Breet: BeTAT TORT ATT: 1
qsarazarrawalnaer-
fara: [93230234] aard saafia meq nest
Aaya [swe]
ufatafercarrrarcgacat 1
Ber: KAVITA ATITTZ-
warfzaarg waa? [qegvotsow] eH Veen

 

emnen—I. D, wearatai for weaetat, indicating the possib.lity of
this Mal. ms. having descended from a DNg. ms,

 

2. A. B.D. qT azTEg 3. A.B. C.D. eenfka
4, D. sAroTR 5. B. qT agud

6 B.D. aanfer 7, AB.C.D. aqamt
8 A. B.C. D. targa:

--- Page 282 ---
safe 22-23] REUNITE — when 4e4

TeMeIteay ToRBTT TTA.

AayIaAEATAT | WER [sat

meatsfe acareazare[ aca ]-!
warayg haga $34 owwxoy ]aAT: 1 20 1
walfiarargaenaMmy | 145939 ]ages

mera saaka qo |

uafzarnfaaaers-

yeaa? afrare [99§004%0%04] AEE: 39

wrorreat feel 3] eaet creitat stem [92 Jee 1
aenfatraarat g asa: [x] weak ga: nazi

[ vtaem |

wires fasenaifanees: [99909293] e-
Naaaat Tera: |
weMNsa aeafiaargzele-
wal ego lsat stat wit 1 33

TafaTaguarge-
RapAPLAKRIXo¥s ]sfery GrBTTATAT |
Ufreneniapargea-

fetaat [x80] afieed fem nu axi

Mttsaret gaxtasa?-

wegiart [929¢¢0%] saafa aoa |

Meet aI HMA
fewer [ 489989 Jaca fatgaisa aeeat 1 gyn

 

 

maea-—1. A. B.C. D, hapl. om. of aq
2. B.D. user; C, ufee
3. ALB. C. arasaror gaaeara

iio MiKo 2G

--- Page 283 ---
442

sareat—1.
3.
4,
5.
6.
7.

afrraqi [ aforee

[acaeg]? zergamgats-

goorteatiot [4543982] AMT Tort: |

qeasa afaeg? sargats-

[arateatista ]rag® [xsxsowgg qeaq u 8G

fafatanrat ctaqenze-

asaaerton [444 ee ] TT: Tata: |

fore: UTA SEMIAA-
crtfranrafea[ 292908 GRR ACAI: RO

eet geareeata[ 955283 | TAT

yee HaTAITaTeaaseaT |

arora acaaraea tg

wrarkamaiqarra [212 Vowoggy | Tet: Was

Saatfraaranega | ¥oR2 [TAT

saerint frat wer’

wigua aifaaatfaaz-

araeeqeafiagaied [ 2RoscsQoRguq] wea usu

agarat qemt a Bat arama: [92] cat: |
asa[yjasaly] atat a araratarfiata feat: von

 

A. B.C. D. aan: & for aaeg 2. D. asaifa
B.C.D, a-wag; A. B.C. Tr. from next verse and
reads as: WattLa ]earaaagy wggeay

A. B.C. Tr. from next verse as: arora AEa TTT TE
qeaifatrafangerag: ; C. asa for aTaT

A. B.C. Tr. from next verse as : atety oeatferrsitsficr-
aaqeatia(? \raiganres ase:

B.C. D. zarfia
A. B.C. D, met 8, D, avafiaatlarganres aa:

--- Page 284 ---
wey 32-33] HEH VT —qariareacy 983

[ qavisteaea |
ayifreafata[ sandy.
stark ysowegased The |azer yom.) |
wagnt Aa_QaaiT-
agae’[ 245928 Jaget ame wer YZ

crferee | ory | fegara-
qOmAATAGQTAY | X58 E548] TT: eA |
Wana feraTearart| co¥ say ]-
fafaczdett fafasa asa: v2

wg aarferrqaare-

arorseseaty [QoXRvge] TTETTATE: |
feaifaetargantsaata[ 09339 J-
ee By aa AeA’ un vz

| fed seat aaa
aeqaeart [qxveur] Treen: |
ATA: WUSTR tafser.
aeafia] Qoovggey Jared mmafaem: Ye

ufatafacantorat aait
wartrarathiafafal 943993 Joa
waliraratefatigaay-

wafeaeat [R2xgyonqes ] fafa ase: xy i

 

wrremi—1. A. B.C. D. defective : argifzzefafaafer ++ ex gua:
2, A.B. C. wae for Waa 3. D. wary

A.B. C.D. ufarmacta

B.C. ou, aFanrag(C. TAZ) aAt

B. °° qearqara: ay aa wea; OC. ee St: TearTATT: ag
ay ast: 5 D. Ty AAA: T_T IT Asa: |

7 A.B. WANTS F On TAs

Nn wn -

--- Page 285 ---
qe¥

afrreraa [ afvrte

TR THRAITAS ATA
gig. dearzata [qavsto] aaa

PATH ATTA eraea-
aierfeacitarfce [1&2 439% EX 089] BATA ATA EN
aaacazeeae: aed [qonkes ]
TAIT TOAST FETA |
I MPATHAIAgTSRTA-
qeasazatfeairateaaraty [yoe@UgRqexssa] ut Yo ul
fanfa[2o]ra aut afte eo ]eeat sozercrfire: |
arndtat eat Way] saat aati: Ye i

[ ge: ]
weal THAR U TAA
Masta [woyzoga] TWA: AUB:
aragaatfzgaragar [q9txy |
went TU, eNT WATT Xs
jarfzeenfarcfeaart-
wat [Rs WIRov] Jor aferfaeragee: 1
ma syaratczaT| sys [earit
faecaasfeay afmanfag: you

wrarfraracaqitstraay [ Yeocsise |
uiferinier: ae artsta:? }

Sqate fartgaaifiar[ 889284 lars
arama saafer ASAT WAT

acaegtarracalearng [azooqs]
fecaraata Jaga asa: 1

waeggrafeanatgaat [¥9¥9598 |
aa. warat afaat fans xz

 

saTeat — 1.

3.

B.C. waTpaeagy (A.D. ate) 2. AL B.C. aay
B. yafafrraig 4, A. B.D, ta for SFaz

--- Page 286 ---
rettet R83] Hetereaedt— qaeisteaet aay

fafattanrat afssenaiar

werezaefa[ ea Ish [TTHITAT |

eqry ara feamifaaa-

warfeaml[ Ro¥Ro9eq shea Taafia TST YR U
wary araregaraga [10% 8 88 ]-

eee gurara® fe acre |
aaTratiTa fee ‘aa fsrzeary

wa: Ray [RRA Rvo0e] waafa we NAY
carfareragafal 95%3 34 [sate

HAITI YNAsaA TTT |

warfaettaigamezaa-

mMaTganaaargaat [Issyeoyssqeq] wyyxu

aosatat a ueatat Bat grame:[ 92] eqa: 1
amfecarfauitat Be: waga[y] sea’ nye nu

[ gatstzacr |
TrarfsayraTy Hareryra-
Hat [wookgose] TSTET FN TATA |
ararsfeercrarfr frrarfia[ 3999 2¥ asa:
aeemfanrarrAaeeraaay 1 Yo
qetgaaracaeraa-
armraat [2o09o%%2] cfg: fase: 1
seat’? fantatagataatiia-
wargaarfart: [2090334] Tae Wks

 

saTeat—1.
3.

B.C, SF 2 ACD. TIE
A.C. D. gest 4, A. B.C. tase
B.C, aarszaz 6. C.D, aed

A, B.C, D. aang 8. A.B. C.D. aafia

D. aerate; 10. A,B, C.D, weet

--- Page 287 ---
 

a aforara’d [ aforero
warrateta fara saa ez.
[aretfeerae G¥UqQuxR azgealanisayya:! |
TATAMATS TA are
watirad [qoRegguy] ufacara wer ¥en
aWTE aatafrerrarar [q¥q¥R Ee]
wife: seat graze:
[ang jetars rrsarer
| Peet getg[ 934849939 Jarisa aT: go tt
*wetfaatmfagare | ev keys ]ged
gine farang sag |
meara watfefaacaafia-
aarfawtaigana: [3093¥39299] ay uk
aeVIHA ATT fag!
TANSHAEATH | 1RROC] ASA:
Meneqarg atgees-
wrarerertisa | 625 3EK2E 253 ]ARISA ATT 1, FRU
mere TorHrTT he:
AHAATTIMTTATS [ Fos ]ATEA: 1
wigaeagarefza-
asarfan atm aftasa’ [iss¥yoggcyg] wee: NRT
avsarat atreitat Bal grave: [92] eye: 1
matics’ asalyjosta [x] [seat] ner
caret - 1, B.C. D. quay 2, A.D. aeag; B.C. wa®
3. A.B. C. acarfta 4. B.C. D. azar:
5. OB, BNE 6. B. vafz; A.C. D. qearfz
7 ABCD. sfasa 8 ABCD, aaifaqvqarm;

--- Page 288 ---
geftet 92-23 ] SETHTTaet— a: 4éy

[ wv ]
amfsalqatsarsifiaszt 993064294 ]
ao: sfa jest aig asa:
farrare cre srereretit:?
waTaTATeATTfaAaAT:” [qoxoR] uu

Fape yqarg FUTGZET-
mental £993 8x5% [sheng Taf: 1
ufmamrasaaaeg zed:
acaiferarateztat [ &o4¥o] freaat: uae UN

fanfawargarg at.

sera [ 95948938 [THAT TOTEM:
smal s-

umdat [¢33063] Anta: aRE: Ugo tI

eafsnictafrszazan: [2¢xore]

We: ays TTRTEAAT |

fatraara faroqarat

wraTaatfrTeT[ 431983 FT AT Nes

vilaigzareatazatt [544024]

ufatafrensaal ane 1
MATA SAA SAca-

Fa QR RQRQc9] Tato fafgatsa fsa: 11 48

 

a pw hp

D. weatITTg

D. art: eaeafearat: ; A. B.C. verse missing.
B,C. aaifea for Fetsz, a case of transfer.

D. aaa 5. A. B.C, D. acatfx

C. THE 7 A.B. C. tare for Tare

--- Page 289 ---
hac

eqreat—1.
3.
5
7.
9.

afro { afm

fafaxaa eared:

qaifiagearss [ Frarferrra:? 940392] 1
avitsiageag[ mers |? sa

aafremgaaarat: [Veer AExYow] yo tl
MATT AAAMAT-

gateaext [FoxyoR] TAST AIA: I
wathatare aq aer-

fegarftaed wfinaeatag’ [5o3gayeygqa] 7 it

agen [¥] arnegat uate gravta [92] we
Be: wT TSM Yaa: GET Aaa: EEE: 11 OR I

[ aategeq |
area gara faa
Saree: [34921383 | eqeineeaqor: |
way Try eT
uaTecatteta[ ASR VNR MART TE 1 8 UI
aarfrat <aaatsfiraca-
warferaeaff[ es Qowod Jat TH: cata |
reishearnrrea crate -*
marfeererat [R¥ogsosy] “amdéfitera: un ova
argaatizg agar.
wearfea[ RR q SORE AERTisesT YT: KAT |
waTyacagyys eT
Rarfta[ aeQqgyegq lased caafia mart 1 ok 1

 

A.B.C. franfatrang (D. faara:) 2. AL B.C. D. -wargy
A.C. D. tara; B. wares 4. A. B.C, D, tag
A.C. D. aaa: 6 B. qeafaa:

A. B.C. D. tory 8. A. B.C. D, warrat
D. hapl. om. [a1éfreaa:'*: ] goarcufit:, five lines below.

--- Page 290 ---
 

avited 82-23 J erect —afafareea 4ee,
farcanrdisfert  qorercarfit:
aatfraarnfaamfia'aar: [v703cee] 1
qearguathaqon| wart.
aarfer ] ater [ BY RGR] BY aa TA 1 oe 1
fafaftaati qoraretfit:
eeathaatmfamenge[ 13530 ]geu: 1
Sara ATTRA AAT
Waqss [<yonownes |germAT TET UW V9 11

qeel qoreacrcurfiteten:
yarzamifaclal 16s o ]raTT

waTrauAa RAAT

arargaar: agers [3¥9459¥80099] Sea: os tI
wae faaaigza-

wat [482928] qoreat [gq] ereerefir: |
SazaTgageautia'-

TAIQaTTETR faa [VK yaysyensIaq] i 6s 11
Balser’ sat celta sree: [92] 1

armdtat weareyar: asa [y] geet: war qd: co 11

[ afafeaaea ]
TErTTarfesss[ Goo ¢]geaisfrwt qT:
creererfit: serrg edte[acary ]reazzent.” [Yogvo] cq tt

 

wrem—1. B.C. armftagifia

2. A.B. C. D. aarfacaearaanenaray,

3. A. B.C. D. faatezae 4. A. B.C. D, eqafia

5. A.B. C.D. aay 6. A.B. C.D. Saitstafaat
7. A.B. C.D, acarat TARA

aide Wto 22

--- Page 291 ---
qo
sareat—1.
2.
4.
6.
8.

nfrererr’t { afereo
{ aaafeaaca ]

aeATHA RTCA Aa AIST EVGA Y|STAT J:
aedsia aadafasincenf® [Qoor%e] stat ua

[ qatvaaea |
aqeacy aenfagenafa [yo] yu: ATT!
asacifa: war geet [erate | faane:* [99] Ws3

[ afantaed ]
garferarayhraracite-
eataTearEr qaaeg [4aQoo0Rqo] FE: 1
Taisa weatshy ate
aaa [Wosy shear anig faa’ i sv i
sitaigeenfaaa-firarfsa’-
wa: [12299°3849] Tart qorarcerfie: 4
wer feaqoneaqatea [ 1¥08 GY 3 ]aEeT
aeatsa Ufa: Ga afta: us u
warfiarea feerpegaa-
darfeaa: [2¥o8¥o3e ] eqeovercerfin:”

stqqasaargar [5999449]

Sea: FATiNNHHfag? sku
azafeaaen’narfia[ 30q¥ve lage
farang geet gorarcerfit: 1
wagaisraaas-

amt [53930598 [att Taahea TeTA NN so

A. B.D. eatfer (C. aeaifia) for acarisa

A. B, C. wenfia 3. A. B.C. D. aaa a

D. frarazt: 5. B.D, aeaq for freq
A. B. C. D. faatfta 7. A.B. C.D. goreufergaa:
A. B, C. D, fafa: 9. D, &az

--- Page 292 ---
gotta 82-23 J SEVHTTR set —afrareTer 4199

wrarferasarferag] aR yee [sere

gat fafacangeratefafa:
eaifrcenterergart-

maazied [40eyvned9 | waafa aTAq oss ti

agen [guen|f @ aaa

Tar avisgifergaigeat: [qaxeoe] |

eH eTaNeAaPMTGTa-

Feezrgarmm: afamra [70%R8aQeod ] WET 1 ast

waeaeaisn gatas’ [93¥92 ]-

ufatreral TTRTCATA: |

cartiamaree | far lant.
ealareratatted | ¥¥0054 435434 [aalSa BTA 1 Go Ht

wronat auetat area [2 jarred:
asa [¥] aaa [x] dernit Bashereraads 3a

‘efa wremter gal AT AcaaATSA
afnaqia: aaa’ |i

 

erea—1. A. B.C, D. arm for att 2. A. B.C. D. aatsmifes
3. A. B.C. D. garferaqez
4. E. has this colophon after the long gap from p. 156,
line 6, above.
5, A.C. end this chapter with the colophon :
fa wiendaer garariacaerarsa aferatqta: TAT: t
B.D. have aentrarigat in place of arenter Fat D. adds
the following post-colophonic statement :
aatdinnfafeaaer qeaddtd fafad wat aq
aredand: afeneitd matt Tata fy a frafa u

--- Page 293 ---
mre feparala:

[ ayataory |
‘egateagen feet era ten fra fererret
qeised amaataieartTaR |
sqq eat fe weoTagwTA-
ret anfeaqaafeaaa Franti

[ mafaa: aaferna |

ory aforeegrare soreatiney TeTT | TT: TT, BT AT Pra ?
wa faq aafea— ‘froteafafeaa: ara.’ 1 ast— ‘feat ara’
afa 1 fraveafafeadiseg ata: [frat ar], fact 1 wee J
qaracarard: Tet aah: aisetara: | et gat: afrHe: A ATE: |
wae sree aren: eaeee eather: | Pear saree: 1 wrote Fea
arafear) atacfeararat Peafa araqi at a fear afa: 1 aar
ferar atat waa eaaestatrafasata | Tara —

aq sIeMAraangiaaay Wag A ATA |
atzalgar faa: afzea frarfeet aret | 2

wig gee: eet: aaeaT gfe Tatar: | et Tee TYTA-

Rage: aarat aga 1 Tea THT TATOT arew ATA: | gy TA A? STAT |

war. eacaTTeT Wr|r: | fanfeady waa a araegi faa Tear

wrem—l. A.C. E, begin this chapter with : aft: frrqad 7H: 4
afaeaqet | B, begins this chapter directly with 1 47
srafrarate: 1 D. begins with : Tat ay: 1 THfeTaTT |
arama yates) araattaera TA:

2. B.D.E. fgardararq ; C. feartarat; A. E. fgarefarat
3. B,D. E. om. @

 

 

{or

--- Page 294 ---
wie: ¢ ] wrafeum: aafarte 98

feqen: feateaaratfa qatar: 1 way ear. a Asal ata: afafea,
a: famfzaa gerd: | ofteaign frre: TET fzaaedner wat ofie-
ata: 1 argat afear: | afters faanfewt are TeaT ATEAT: TATCT
faarsa: afc: 1 faargat faafeat: |

wareaa— ‘ag gem avar gearfe aresaed,’ ate.
gfageaa | eased ema: aaa afesa aglaw!’ | “ad
gremarar garfa faarfe wart cite area, gar sy ya Hray
qaatad aafa 1 afe aesfrercafratad aatsa’ ag qaaer
aaa 1 afar’, [frato, ] eaqreqat agedt at’ [slfaato,
sc] seme waa -gar- fret aera TALI TTS TAA
mare aatery 1 atfeh aTRTATeeTaerTfeAaT afearet
wate | ‘ar aafe manfafacs hese aera g ‘anierafir aa’
[atfraro, 3] eae ariariareacitert qateanta | Ha: ? tla
sfad: 1 [aaa aar] saratt aniamiaz [catheters | RT |
Aa So: | aH: GataaT ATEATTEATTL THAT FATA | ‘qaterciter
ai’ [aftato, 3] aaa TaaniaceacireTTar SATHUTAAT SD
mreay | gaan sfelaarfear [ara Eato, Q| xara TATU
aay aaa 1 afe ‘at atem aay geaTla WAY aATTEAT
aacad aiaafagar deeafe 1 cemrancaaaaareg | Ae ate |
garceraroraraeat ofearsat waqeta oareaa Far. A
aieareg-arrarnt, zeae” araaaas wa atasfaay, 7 aie
arexarrarfit 1 aa aasaa arafsqata ofearer ar earfata
[ qaarzsreaq | 1

senor fg ‘crmraeaisizated 3 area: [atafaato, &]

cera tfaanat gree grata a eae, ‘afaferar fasiar yfea-
araifeataanar:’ [arafaato, ¢] sera wfafeaarat faaest gare
aasta, ‘afeaten fea’ xaarft gevenfsceTt afseqisa:

———— et

 

eaTemt—1. D. aresaeat 2. E, wate for aaae
3. A.B. C. ryTeure 4. A.B. C, aatst
5. E. Tro: TAMTTAtT = «6.
7. D. E. taet 8.

9. A.B.C.D.E. saat 10. A. B.C, ae |

1. AL B.C. Baran 12, D.E. add arat

A. B.C. om. 7a to watft |

|

E, ava

--- Page 295 ---
que wraferre® [ srerfeerte

afeaferar: | aera fe gage fran ferred qaae ofeacrfzaT |
eagar fart cineca #: qaétmeafeda: ? gea—

ATTA STATA Bl at Rat faa afacet 1

aera feafsst qeat saremaae 1 ar a arfssr feraer
gfsearr’ git 1 aerat cieaccrarsaagiseqay eaTe |

aa gafgaaea gftentt: areaa gaafadtaa— va afaq
qa “gatwaarsrarraat waadaarert = ofeeqaartiar-
area gepy freraa ar afes fa | ate fram arag cath oft:
ale seararqadt at, arzat arfesrara eft 1 stag aafafa
word) atafe? agraararzer wae ofeear afearsraror
gla tga: Het, qeaeg aararaaal fafeserareer agrafent-
grarrgiacar fear arert, aleaiae a grareraaarsaay
RaTeAT i 7 1

qaquiy stefiarserdt ya ar sgn |
wet area: SalrarTETaT ATTA WRU

qaaafe shefanfsert 1 qefoy y ateaereft | qaererfer,
sfsefanifear areit 1 arzar arr sftetserafe afar aay
aval faarstafaa: | ‘qaerufa sftelaarfst cata aaarta ale
MaaaaAaarearat Ararat faarfestarageraat saratat afgra-
freTraare— areit 1 waar frarfset qaerefr ofse: 2? seff, 7
wet: 1 aeetfr verarftr | aetamsea® araad art afepaa |
RAAT BT aa: 1 wa wT Hiatt faarfentfaeaara: tated
sfaraa afa calf yiadaa’ faaristegaay |

enem—1. A.B. C.D. E. afseuft
2. ABCD. E. afecatr:
3. EB. sae 4. A.B, C.D. E, afteafit
5. A. B.C. faat -gap- qeaaai
6. A. B.C. aearai for aaraett
7. A.B. C. om. eilfagindta

--- Page 296 ---
wate: 2 ] erafaamt: aaframre 4k

sea ar re:, ST SeeaTa:, sredfaatfearar: sAToTA |
red Fie MARAAMBTAT | Aa ate — carta wat aA’
litfaare, &] afr 1 seaaTaHaT Was Sat Tafa, eraafrerd: |
aa oreit fanfsar ws ar arm: [gear]. aefifataarfsatta-
[eafa]taias: 1 aat sitfavaaarafera: sro facarreeqr
af sriisaifendt sata aaa fe “(9 @]! werdsar:” [sfrate,
92] ayaa svisaiggt a oA 1 weasy— aay
‘SS aT srr fanfsregerart adararnda  faarfeararaea
Gaasag: 1 wafeserat ararat faafssra: sar arfearat:
afeat va 1 a gear faarfeatar aaaasaronfaard fara,
TATATATATT |

Vary weanafargry 1 Téerfy afee'ferag ysaurat
qt ofsedterafir faarfsarare eft aaaery 1 aeqar fe farsa
qfasafaata? age oredr | aerat— gaat qat afeesaererfor
wert arett Tard, faafeaaat wzar atta sfa, went 3a-
aieda, TAA aTaT | Tie HeaHafaae AdeqT HATE
mranaTad ? aenfas: 1 Tra— we afafetg aig aeqy-
stir: | camarft— ‘arena qereanes a THT Ba eg fitst ae area
Ta TT eR araatat TATA Tay vat sisal wreqemares
eraeaea: ayeaeaaTea Bea’ | caf? efeetaauin faarfsar-
STAT: | TST AT ATT: | MITT SewATAT: | A araz, qea vared-
faatfearar: erat: 1 warfa taeqegrateaer Ateaey athe: gTeTT:
qferaet | warfy eqeat at Azar artneoafata | vat [aareaishe
ait + Greaiaamerga sraateeafate 1 wa’ afe-qeraaaren:
wear: HeMeNeTa ? vse Aega— datagra aredtht
qa F HAAS aleT |

wa stefan: | cad? ataraferaefearsrom: arerfratn: |
fand’faanfadtaa— ‘ud arafrarm’ sf 1 qq FT srafaarat
eqremt—1. A. B.C. D,E, Gd for ne 2. E. fate for fatgor
3. E. uaa 4, A. B.C, eqeaeq
5. EB. warfa 6. E. aat for
7, A. B.C, defective: A. ata -gap- af; B. watorara qe
Gfa-; C. warner [7] adfa

--- Page 297 ---
quot wrerfinerter? [ srerfiear

fafzse: | wa aea fafeszea' aaot ‘wa arafae sft | wea
farareaaa? aad aarssafeaasarn: atefaert gfe 1 ae ate:
‘qa srafaaT: wasat: BrafsaT aad: | carted g® sareara-
ara waste arafanrat: oferta wafer 1 Tae Tae
ga, sramarareaacat:, at ATaraged F TAET-WSA-TT-ML-SAPT-
fafarredt:, gaara, werd ca: yaa sonra, fearufa-
agar ar: faatfsat qgd:, seraarfe

Rafammeaet ana) at ater: | Tea etaea fawrT: |
aa ada ser i gat areca fear, atacarit wrng |
are anicrafa fart oe, ear Y wma safes Tza
raqer— gremumay wro:, uUfaleteq ara, sieefercar aT,
afsefafacar frat, Sfezeaerer fafeacadige: | seTR:—

art ufeaia: SAT a fawat @ Aeatt ta |
aaedan: dat: etafaariia geat: eg: 0°
[ feaaafeataa ]
fearafearararatga teats —

anat gaeaa Bawa at Fane |

anon fafaszt va aerat atfeerg 1 eheeiefa? arcane
anfafaaeaiy 1% fattstet:, smeatiedtiarat 3 fawrere
MUTT: AAT ACTTAT Frater ayadfasatea at

 

eqrett— 1. £E. fafafascer
2, A. B.C. om. &[fa (previous line)" 37]&
3, A. gap for ard g ; B.C. om. THT
4. C. Ya:
5, A,B,C. om. atm: 6. B. safe:
7, E. gap.: a[aar' wrt afat]ait:, two lines below.

g, Sankara in his commentary on Lilavati, 7-8, ascribes
this verse to Acarya [Aryabhata]. See K.V. Sarma’s
edition, p. 7.

9, Mss. om. tf

--- Page 298 ---
wets: 2], feataafcatay qe

ma stendrnfare va attain eft savadad, 7
gaeaqareeara: alt at? Seat) Tear — gravel a ofeavsaray
qfeaferat | aaner Tear afee. age, wre fama i at
qoqarsiat | nafs qose qraeqVsT agit qeals arazeh qosesey
Tela | AWAAgA Husa aala aaq waaneAved Teale |
ua qraengia qIss UH: TUATeTATeT WVST Tae, aaa a
aartal art: | wat Tasaly atsay | gsad wag! afe ger: aaTaT: |
annaat var efa sfaorafasale |

*seaag:— qeRrenea a gh Fearat ater afer

aed atm ata wat | ecaaaifiaeeerrare4n: [4932 G00] |
wa aagrafs |

a: gava fgataat fafaatr: ? seat afe aqme
qceuaaigaim aeaed,® [afte] afaaaratara fara eit est
aafaarat feat ae sated sear galgaifaaay 1 weet
qaneaeaferar stat fafaatr! 1 [ae geezer aeqey anigati-
fantq wet azafe i] afe aqimatta gscagaifeata aad
[ate] sfaameiaa feara afa asa aafaatat fetta 1 ag
aramtfaging cearfeafea: 1 afsatreeafafadeaaiaae? gH:
aise’ vata 1 atstafasa’ feairuvafedtal aeariadadtce-
qa fafrata: 1 feattsa xreardtndia ante aarorteaarte
ATTAIN faa ‘aeacgad say’ [ThraTo, av]
gaaq una fatitea famadta, facafaatfaaared aanrs-
ammrafamaterca gearat fafrate: 1 yzearclafratreg safaa
vafa 1

 

euremt 1. Mss. Corrupt : B. E. gsataq; A.C. D. qsatag
2. E, om. Bam: to a4 aTAfs, two lines below.
3, A. B.C. om. fgatar aed
4. A.B. C. om. getat fafrate: - ;
- 5. A. BC. D.E. afawet 6. A. D-E. afaiat
7. ..A, B,C. D. gap for 34 :
8. E. om. feadtitaa to wafa, 4 lines below. —
Qo Ato 23 SLT Tos

--- Page 299 ---
qe erafearaa [ srafsrato

[ gi saataradeat |
sq TaTarara rasa aay —
gagiaqaaan aera sadlaat: | 3

AMAT WIT: agate: « aaavafearearai fa 1 wart ae
a vfaaot | cianfadt aearraeafacaarat gfe aa) tT
zaagafafaquaaiaimaAaa: fezowseze] t ut eaeloran:)
ahamsa cadtnan afer waleat: | eat ala? WeaeATTATATT,
cfanfaaao: agamita | a va sadtoar feginar ead a
@ festrcadageazag: [q2vaegger] |

aaa? eaeinarafafgat® gremrsreareral | HAT weer —
[ fafaz aqdrramaaecnataereratiafa 2 aatequEct
aar aafaee aceafe, aaeqerecafafs 1 | aaat— aearfaeeat
eqalgat sana grameaaedar aadlne: | ag a aT areererfarat
aga fa sfaey ? ae dte: | dared? Fe: a oe sft, TENE
aqdineaea dgaer a aed we wTaefatntfefrerizced | TAT
qataanal eqertea afe vetrmaearit’ saatara: |

ag adnaaddsarkerad adulssq— afe qataa-
wat: egeaimaman = ofseafcar wea, [aar ]Aanedtaeeor
feace’ eft asa afear faafentest | syaisarasrercaras fara’
qriacaat argineala, sarsdactor ag acifaey—aie qataeaaat:
eRe maar qaqkmaarainat aac," [car |aaratasaaat-
qaninitnames fafafe qfmetead 1 aa <fedt afga’ qat-
qignat aadtnaaifaat 1 cat exer eaataraaion: | at Zea”
eqieai—1. E. om. & 4 to aadtaar:, next line.
2. B agat 3. E. aat grafafgat
4. A.B.D.... ft; C, om. azifa ; E. aarfe
5. A. B.C. D. egé for epzy fatter
6. B. fear 7 Om. A.C. sat; B,D. 14
8. A. B.C. D. gap for 41 a¥4 9, B. adds 4
10. A. B.C. D, eqat; E, om, the word,
ll. A.B.C.D.E, gant

--- Page 300 ---
wens: ¥ ght agreadteaneti: qs

wafa aa seasqa | sad A

aTaTAN eaelaaegearesaateday: 1
sineaer aad fata aifariang u
[aararentay , v. 2%]

eft | qataeeaay TATAA FAT AMT AA AATETAT SAAT: VERT
faacqafgat cgat arraa: | afer fet eadlaraatt eierearar-
qeage fanadizar uu .

[ gi agadtaane: |
sea aritag mars ATs —
AEANTAT: VATA GA: eal: |

eaeanam: eaanifadioa: 1 caHlaaed talea, TET ealaeT
ATT: CASTATIT: | TA TAMITASAEA, Arisa Wass T1 Wa
saved? aaa? aleleafaene aeateaer aafe afreey-
qarar aa hs garaerore Saar aTEA AS MAM STATO TF qheypara |
zaanifaniaar: cateatactcaat: 1 geqarorat erat a at fare:
a seaarariead: | TeMTeA Ca aT TAGAATET AT TAIT AT
wahegeaafcad: afeafera: | a frtagareat ferared qfeaaea
fara: :ofeaat agiea goat Forfar: Tac: 1 Alara aTerTTT-
afeaarfta: 1 aeitarfire: efteaite: ofeafera: 1 seadtaafiaat: |
gsanfiaat Aasfeaatvs araea ua, aeneafeafataaaraty
TAA AAaT AMAT: . OT

aa H Taeea:, TT aT Ae eft? aa wat: qe eT
meg wacala a ararTsae seaafara: 1 aararaa wet aarfarat
mega avieqreqcara wT ararasea arsaina eft 1 ors.

aa ofeaduged Fed ar area aaa’? ate aganreiiad
gsqnacfaat aed, car sfaameriat fara afer weet aafa-

 

eareat—1. A. B.C.E. om. ad ; D. aftada for afead

2. C. waTeet 3. A.B.C. D. EB. atarg
4, C. aredaa:; D, arexmat: 5.. E.om, af

6 A.B. DE. werd 7. A.C. om, &

8, A.B. C.D. E. midlet 9, ABYC. E, om. Faq |

--- Page 301 ---
{co wre fearrrt [ wrerfaate

arat: aftaat, ae sreer[fagfrs] zreofen: fader: |
qhaaaiaefean gat agafett ar oadata: serrata
afea: okadaia: [ofeadstrefgar ar sera: ] gaat: | Tizag-
aT va teen | aeaea fearifateta sara |

rey TTT sage fate gr feared” [ srafeato, 3 |
eeaeataag arfeatat aq adismae: feaarfietad ? geal
gfeaddartagarey: | aa’ feaimarata sfaniferq | aa a
aqgaigaweaamfarg safatga: 1 aaagarnifaay = sfe
[ saapfaa:]* |

[ aaagurat wea: |
Teas freraas —

TSATA UMA ‘BAa_aTA WE Ue |

gern afagr: | ga: TerTT:, ageraar gfe
ara | fey sraayo ght AAT | aeagarar qe: | ATR
wsz:,° oat wate [afar] ara: weran’ ara: Ast wea qaran: |
TAT: FT: ATCT FAA Ta weaqy ailas-ATAMG-dTa-
ATHY TAS-A MG SISS-ATTS-ATATT- MSTA: =| aM
aufsay— afe aganerad yutear: Tyg tarsal eT HAT
[x3ecgcc] [aead, car] sferataratta Peart eft asa:
SAHA: SA: | ASATY ART AMTTAIT, NI ALIGHT: TAT: |

 

qaq— 1. E. wet for wer

caveat — 1. E. afgat <fga: 2. E. om. 3m fedtaree
3. B.C. om. Wa 4. Mss. read 49 for TH
5. So also writes the commentator Raghunatharaja :

ay feilaroeqa va aeemer UBS TIAA araT yar
gaafaarafafs 1 aa gatdattgubinofaara gcafafeay

atsarerafaare af gaqfaa: |
6. Mss. 88%: for sz: 7. C. Raya
8 C. WIR 9, BLE. qt?

10, B. steovareqt: ll. A. D.E. a4

--- Page 302 ---
wie: x ] alvarxareraararernrertta qq

aafad fama seagarareaar efa ? seat—sreagqaren yatear:’
gfe aaatq 1 ay ata aaaneatfasatfad ofeardtscaenifa
eeqy | penrerrrarafiararaa cafe qeezataafetinecafireserem-
SVqAAA: YUEAAT: |

sad a

afergafa aera saretaretsheet: 1
dararedgatieaigera: seat 1?

aig |

mq TqarrarHrayiragaHaTTsea [ vee tas learufaaq
qerafacardtad 1 aay? afe aganetta agqaeareat gaeqfe-
waa asad, [rat] afaarargire fearr sft wear ueyz: |
aq? fawaferina arafecat[ar:] 1 wafsaratarcd! waft) 3
anlawear TU UTaet aafratea Taga: aaeaT:, TT =z
qanrt afa |

wy agareaaal TU: aaeat gafadlaad 1 aq a wat
daca teqeaa fqaeay ? meme | 9 greased aay Arata eeT:,
wal a a TUsared Gaara | aaa ge argaaard qaasera-
fargiy[ a Jangataga [v3 0000 [aera | ata areereatar
agararfe [wgecgea] aEeay | argercarsd gazed ulster sf
aq atgargereat geatfafa uw i

[ atvargaraaarerarnit |
OR-STFg-AT TAA AAT ATA AT ATS
tara wasar Taga aaa gaat |
tayain faar araizale avai ty il

fawn wae: 1 La: UAT, TeqeaT:, Ufa
awit magi a wa wawtoret UT teasat: | THaaqaanft

sateqt—1. A, B.C. aera
2. This verse has been quoted below in a slightly different

form, on p. 209. 3. Mss. read &¢ for 3
4. B.D. E. adage 5. B.C. add F
6 AC. aasgutad ard. B. dlasqutaart
7, Be aay

--- Page 303 ---
qs wrafrarara [ ssrefieate

wad vauia-aar-fren Uaara-feae-area eft gente greu-
weal aaoT:, faagrar ufe:, ‘AeTscaaraat facat, Terealsaa-
gat afar a waged ef safranadiad aavactufer
af 4 qadfrsaretaaaratiafe, aeaTerty—

aafraregiacsra:” saa? aferitat 1
avaagfaened wax aiaweu sft |

waleqd— aaa | WIAA CT ACITA, WIvATH-.
mare) ““sgigqrrahaea eamramana aa ft 1 afaeqan:
gaaa at a eafa: seaatfasar at afwed | sane waft:
seraraafnarteit, aa: seaetdtaterea fir! gafadaaderter
wataaeat | ea? aeMg aaa awafefest fasaete-
eareaanad waft went feqnedad = aaaearArarareat
wadl Weareraa aed 1 at ae ATTA aHUfeT
wa, av stfacsie: | asa” Hherel aansargeaarea: caer
HET AsSlaL, Al T BATT AAA HHeTiaT Ta, mrecraratlaea:
seratasaaay |

MIATA Us wee 1 HHeeahenay mauve
Ba erra faa Tease yITAILT SaI— yal War weet: gah,
WITT AT ATT gasteteagatarfe - [aaig aaeita ]- af,
wasat dar auaegfaar waa i aar a awe ofeasa
sfassrzent [ant] sfarardt aa a anaes faft 1 sat
farcry aha yada ef? seaa— yarn eat afe:.. TReargTAT
area wi aateqifeat afta sara wala gar ataaey-
afrenet aaa [aaa] 1 wet ga: ehenwcfanoreda” afernras-
safafaadt saaeaar waar sacar wafaer saad setafa |

 

sareqt—I. Mss. read fastaurt for wraafee,
. 2 ABC. fast 3. ABCD.E saat .

4. B.C. afert 5. A,B, C.corrupt. = ~~ -
6. B, #holcdtamar «7, Mss. read ae ,
8
9.

Ch. TacaaaAates aga: diuacaatans: t _[aeafgar, 3.4]
C. om. FT Pe 10. -Mss. read Raat

Il. A. B.C. Aater-7 ; D. Haag

--- Page 304 ---
wie: y ) atcarmaraameraaranta qa

gera afafearearat ast: Tsfa—

aggafearsisiaad gta) oy:
aneaattadt qeé wa oafg afar iy

seorfeneda 1 aafasrairearaaa gaara? —
araaa fara mpareaqal(1se¥1 40 any 1
anna? acafararertariccaremenatay® Fara’ un ste

aa sufat aed’ ayer waar gaarataqiecty’
afamad sada’ a aheraaa ? gar a agteadar’: sade
[wae laa: iaat aw arafasate: sastt | ud ow aay
argent wate | “saat ase”, tadaal qaqa, “TIT TAT
qataarae” [atfadadfear, x. v.99) 1 gar a rete? arta
aaa’, aeagevaraal wed, “eveatsiea aixarag” | aha tadfgat,
¥. v.99 | xf ge a satfamiaaaA” sata | Temaaaea af:
aawpaefad waafate | aafagraqeualameta 1g —

aatreaanay afanagd a axaaarat |

gfe 1

—
*

The commentator Nilakantha ascribes this verse to Prabha-
kara. See his commentary on Aryabhatiya, iii. 9.

A, B.C. D. om. & to faazz, next line.
Mss, read GTWa Td for FTA 1 WATT
B, aaa

voeF YY

Cf. this verse with the following one ascribed to Visnu-
candra by Prthidaka (860 A.D.) in his comm. on
Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta, xi. 54,

aea aia faaqeqarraseteaa: (Maer gto)
aqaea ai mat agiaifead gu ou
6. . D. wafafa for wafad et 1

7. Mss. defective : A. E. eat-gap-4qi@:; C. eat Fqrateq;
D. eatea-gap-Aa2:
- 8B wade 9. A, B.C. add gu:
1. AC WR

--- Page 305 ---
Gav wrerfisrra2 [ sraferdte
aafarrarare—
sara: fafere-aara-cdter-qama-aza-feMTAAT: |
‘anypiinganatarecattfeaiaaaran:
afa |
aearsa— aaa eeT TTT uafa 1 ufafzaaataiedt

afgdaeneleraa, aera aq’ ate | seaeiferataatita | watsaa-
grag fee erar War

Hag weary —eRencar ahead arelfearqeraacar sft

_afe? meqanear, [oar] ‘arfa aiaararfafgarfa satsarfa aria
weanTeal wicqafed, Sememear Ward 1 aft gaeafa sats
alfa? geaa*-—

qlaegaranyeafawaawnNsay |

aateratisiitara ware: afanea a

aeaiat aaarar tqzuidaraifa’ atfaary

Agegay® qq aasg_vladeEny 1

aaatatlaqat] a ggatat aq away:

afanatiart ofeitat ata a

TasATTHt B araegarafs 1

searaaratat a aeqafadat’ gat in

qraafaatarat faeenrat qaqa a
smMfact anteea agint Sizaca wz u
aatioqeg wmaalea’! fanaa a
att ad famata sadafaataq uv

eareat—1. A. B.C. qrapat 2. B. om. Ua
3, A. B. om, afg
4. A.B. C. om. aft to fafgarfa, ‘same line.
5. E. adds 4 before gz .
6

A. gap for satHaritfa to wee: , next line; B.C. gap
not indicated.

7. A.B, dd aff 8. B. qian

% Bogart. 10, BC. aeaad (B, assrat) faaat
ll. A.B, C.D. E, e7aret - De

--- Page 306 ---
gets: ¥ | alvarreremreanrntat ek
geaifa wastaris

afe eqerear acai saisaria oferdtara wafra, ez
g a facut afasrrart wer 1 aemtafrsraarat veer
qeqna aaa | we eet THIS Tad Teranfasfaqaa wfasata’
ay Heqanfasfaraa gerd watate 1 ty ste 1 “meat Hear:
qoitaea, arsazsa ola dad’ ara’ areqera? [aserearai, 9.
4.22 nasxaasra | afr faz 1 vaguasenguana ofurea
afr wear eReTeaT T 1 HeaNTaT ofentaNat wan fad,
eHeTeA F dfensrefafearia sate |

vfanfaatant wafa afaatac. ta: afaasea ater cfaerfeatar: |
wafer owfeatat: ) & at efaefeaiat afafearea afaratat: 1
a a smart fagutea car earearay to afeart: afafeaaafear:
aqrerrar: | wferaraa art Ga: watetaT ht ?
al @ dtetara a atearen: Frat afr
gaat oa afar fata scaraat
masaaiadtat a zwamt safata a
get gaat Beateada wanteTa: v
aaiat stat aft aaraaata a1
waleraamfea| ea jezd”? araatfitat:
vaaratta sais ie |

vfaqeitn fare: 1 caefaea ater: Peat 1 at gat <a
qamed gt yferar | yfeadt arm Westeorergia greieay

 

sareqt—1. EE. adds efa sfaqaa 2,

Cc. aafa
3. A. THEI -gap- @q:; D. gap not indicated; C, om. a9: also,
4. C. om the sentence area etc.
5. A.B.C.D. om. areasa aria diqa
6. E, om. Tg
7. A. B.C. D, Wat -gap- qeaaaat
8.

A. B.D. vert fafa; C. aenfafe; E. semrfate
9, D. waned gaat da aig 10, Mss. siftadrag
BTTo Ato VW ,

--- Page 307 ---
45k mretfeara? [ arafrare

efa | araat fare: yfare seguad | Ges: a ua yfertal ceqar
afe afsa: 1 arfa ga:? araaarred? satstatia ?

aaamafind aay aaania a

amt demoaiaa’ asiqaaaia® au

agai arta faa catia aga:

agarcafemaareraanit a’)

afa ardanratia asentfgcerfa aria a” 1

araaaa® aaa mead fe faa: i
vatfa satsatet

wradisate attat waar: waak, wrasanift |
asa wae faarfefectafearaa 1 afe Forfa: cara [car] aotfsest
afaafe afagaaarat: arqgaa:, fade: gawgfer va afaatk
qaaaar:, To a aaafegatarat! ogfseqist: 1 Tat 4
‘grata aati ay [ataato, ¢] ef aafacarataataafeat-
THITacaaT aT Tera ATTTAT, TeaTAge waretera waarfaasee |
aar gaufaaiaa” waaife: shepard tereterasrr: Taeartray-
aaargeat: | ot HT GaTSTAGeAT: | waafacaea aac:
SAAGIT AT |

qusq— seratafafa: qaiea saad, walaatesy a | a
Ascara caress ara faca[ ca: frais lar araq Greer xf

 

eqren—l. E. om. a4: 2. E. wraeq ataaafaa: for eifa ga:
3, E, araaer 4, E. dhatfamraga
5. EB. astraait 4
6. A.B. C. corrupt : art (B. ae) TATA (B. ATA) ea
7

E. reads the line as : Tanratla deaifa arfa 4 araata g 4 and
om. the next line.

8 D. aati 9. C. hapl. om. of afaafz

10. B. aq

ll. B, wasteqfagarat; D. waafegateqatert

12. AB.C.D, aa-aat 13, A.B. C.D. waa”

14. Mss. eafase (2) or tafase

15. Mss. corrupt. A. B,C. D. sretfaeat arr:; E. arenfacart
(seaza) fra:

--- Page 308 ---
wire: % ] divarzarraarercararta re)

araeateae! faaatia 1 vente wea wa waatfa:, Sar’
gfaqenia® | aad agaaaeret wararrrefaremiaa! siegatet ?
ay ae, greases vgiary [Harsto, w | gaova-
sifererma 1 ETT Breratarateea sfatteaarcar
afa agi ainfeart fear a Ua gaaaaraat arraferar: yfeaar
afi, feaazamqadara | F gaet wach: 7 a Fano: | fe-
frqogsa’ [qyszrsoyoo] sft mfaerg [atfrato, 3] sta: |
aaaa PAT yraat agar: ? waswfaaarfa aerarfor 1 Tea
sagraaiaret fararareater | aerarfin qa carer sega wART-
fra gear reat at aTofrae: 1 aatlaay— ‘aTaaiearfa
arerat:’ afa 1 sey ga: ‘aaraatearfe ararar: eft qatar) aT
qrareg fg aayTTAH |

ay we gaeTAT aoa fT —

enigsivaratcanigaateg ataat ATe: |

SMatseerieien atatarrs saw”?

[atetaea faa: |
antesivarea” gfe? qatvesnata: ge! afar: a
aaieeetizad, at aatatn: | ‘<faafaat wafa afatar ete
get marry | fanferareg araat are getaafe ‘weqaarfeaata’ fer
gery | atatswerfarstar ef ‘efawra: ceqsar’, “es: treaties
efanr: gataaie get way | ‘Alad BeQuveday’ ef

eerie watat aa Efe. da seas aTaRRATT: A TeHTATATT
gfe 1

 

sareat ——1.  E, aerrrat 2. E, waweqagiz:
3. D.E. sfaaad: 4. Mss, 3aaqrea:
E. a4

6. This sentence beginning with m4 occurs in Raghu-
natharaja’s commentary also. There too, the reading is

aaraaieata aera:

7. A. B.C. gap for Wer 8. A.B. alate
9 AL B.C. wale 10. A. B.C. om, a saay
11. DE. eatgaisarg 12, B.C.D:E. add here zatasdt

13. EB. 9e@qt: for It 14. D.E. add @ after aft

--- Page 309 ---
qac wsrefeara’t [ wrafirate

waaay faasart | aaraI— aaa fares:
a aaa fara: | wa? aaTaeMATl ateral feqa staat
AAT |

mearaATaTaT =«=—- eaevaracfasanfears frontage
sqrqarrarha aretat:’ ef 1 ara camareesfear ? sotdfa wai
aq [tfaato, ¢] eft, sia sat ae meedtft satfarasfrcrat
waa T Feat savant fase fagwa> arrar say
wir) aeta aerat Arquosepfa fe wart, &: dfgarsrerfafza-
wae | Tea aa satTeaTefeme wer
safae'freaa 1 aay? aa orafetane eff, sradasqeata-
AISAATATY aTaatea Maatea, wrath: | wtf satelite erfercar-
Qt aet araat araat:, sodar ged 1 art aaaTTT
aafaer ust ofepard, aerate | aa fe aeararraaerata
saqgtia 1 aaat ae wRaaeordafe wala, “read Heat:
wo, TT pega” [aseterest, 9.9.22, WaSATASTATEAT |
aft | wear ‘aadea area’ senate fad ‘araates aretar’
aft agaaafrae Sarararat arcafa aretacarrseernfala | gaat
aaltisa 1yaT:, 7 tara ahead: areas, wT a TTT ATATAE
waa aanfafe 1 wea wat gat erafeqet Tat
aremaian wangaate wfaarafaaea |

wy TMaara araea sift satsrarfet ?

AAT ATATAT TAT TAT TAT
aaarat a aaet aattasfaraa:”

 

aqteqt-—1. The mss. read: aaramtq 2, A,B. C. add here qanert
3. A.B. C.D, E, 3aaq faerq
4. A.C. aea-da:; B. asa ea
5. B. fag; D.E. fagra
6. Mss. defective : B. fafe: (2) ; A.C. farsa
7, A.B.C. om, fa 8. A.B. C.D. E. arafa
9. C, aR 10. B.C. D. afer

--- Page 310 ---
wie: % J aicarxenaaararactt ft qk

gaya a nett ATAAEHTARA AT!
geaaaral a saTATA

waaghaaraye = =—|—-aafasTanaT aTAaaTATa tT
gaisddead dacazt aaa far | dace ara fa
qeaefafrd arrd [a] wafa, aa? aaeat: med aageae:
waaa | aa qagaatiasaedtraead | afgararestt 4 gaeafaaz
a: Haat: FeeIaAAATAATT TATA

afenrqafa aaa saniteratsiger: |

efi. mearafra wafa 1 aftaq efrafaqararar:, afer
ara adaa Sf aia ara) a aeaataatrfatarsarest ara
fase: | aeqaratarat [Aa aia] attr ara safeararearfe:
aendas aaaaay | aaiad Fgrsaay TaeTGATTATT
eqraaies area Ecaen waardearer’ anaaageaahran:* [ sa: |
‘q’-mearfafa gata fafeareaTqaarariaay | ATA AEAT RATATAT
atigaieinastafgaararatiata Tet TTA ATA | AEATT
‘sqgfarararge aafaaraTtet aaaarasatnaiasaaeaed eft
Bary |

gaat  dearaaarsarerartn | avait | HeaATCAT
sfrarfeattr | acetate eRereat Tiaraeatat ia sfecer | arata-
meaaa g egeraa sfasfzarfa—

aaizdvarsteaafeaareg atadt Ate: |

sarfeaearate |

we are sea: — ‘aanrfrrertfaar grote 1 ara aster
ardteea adaraarad: datea Surfraa— afe qrefaaragrareearar

 

aret—l. D.E. sfaiaz 2. C. wad for aa:
3, A. D.E, saver for sqrete 4. C. agasrarftadar:
5. D, waa
6. A. awaT-gap-3; B,C, om. sfaaifzarfa atm
7. HE. ataq for ata

--- Page 311 ---
Ao wrerfrarats [ wrerfirato

aad, [aer] od: [xf ]atd. fracas gfe, ase aex-
WaT | & fawaqor adarafafagzat: arat: TACs fara —
afe grarsieadamatyt asa [aar] wasarsfead: fafafz,
WEIN AIT) ase: weg) ga HVaTEAH: gaa. ? geqa—
asa weassig: a mate: 1 at ada: ATA TSTTY
wade: wea: | da feaatgdY ghagaca acati areat
eRerS aa

warfeeareat faa egefaeqamag 1 aerat— ‘Tate |
rem saeauifr agufafnfaataanate [ ¥¥¥rves |
gear asad, aaraveradty feaetf amifr seat
wt green felafct are-fere-afeerfratesra avae | wa
wera fafatafa 1 aa megeattaricadeatriaag— afe ga
ata weygeadiagieaal aad, [aars |Atserateiy fact ofa,
water: oftaat: wea 1 tt gremfeghns egret went
fauifnciad afaherg | aa? ae where farariad 1 waeq sramfiar-
att! meat faarsava aeaet | atacmeqafrat aararta ET
at ar ater) qalaqare aufasy— afe guetta agqyia-
faftanasieg [@2ves |gerafrsagiie aged, ger afrarar
eia feaea: sf, ad-mre-fera-afear amd | sfrefmareay-
fafaasifecaet attear: Ae <fagiza: | ae aragay [2] 4
meram [qc] a faamacdta vated vate 1 aa Haart
Teas + | pareg araafaait’ ase areal faareava | fanaa
amerereate Fate | er fefafa aroreaereara: fed ? gag —
qaiea aay afateqar:, gd qaaqaq sft 1 wa fafafaoqar
waft) aa ed faa afe weqraqacarato afseaigat weaed,
[aar] egeaeareator fear ofa, TAICTIST: Basser 1 arf.
rac fray Tea faiaaranisarfacgfterisat gee, [aar]
am fafairter fea’ eft fafrarsat faarsara aeaea | gear?
aufaree wear ed ad fara reTTaaat fate ay
gift geyarat winfas ofearfaatsare | ae qaee-
ufvtsd faery ? seqe— ate “aeaaereaaty afératsat

 

saTeat—1. FE. om. ATFSATar 2, A.B. CG D. E. Stat
3. Mss. aa 4,5, A.D. E. art:
6. B.C. gap for | to fraex =f, next line.
7, A.B. C. gap for @& to atzait, same line.
8 C. aar aT 9,10. C, aeqeqq

--- Page 312 ---
aie: & J afirmreraafaata 4a4

aaa [car] egeareraty faa gta aufaaq | ya
asada Goat afe ofseater:, [acer] waa fafsado fear sf)
a: qaauiias yornte: aT eraie weary sft war Iara
aretha a acmagrarad als gaat atafadeafala i x i

[ afaatareafearts |
mga TAT ATA ATS —

abraraar an Ft waareeastrareg FT arexr |
aigzaat faa aigratararaat: ti ¢

® xfaadeatsarmarerzraedt gv afaara aata, & ZF
qfeadiar: ufafeaared gt fafassar 1 seat fata) faalat saat:
fafaseat: | wearers. | vd gaat waa sefad wafa—
aaararawafaaraaT:, “aad aad aed arafafa 1 afar.
qaaHEAATA STaT eq | ate eRencar earaer fedtarat
yaaa? osfaraeiar[ftjafasadt a ea: 1 ‘afeatarad: far
fata ? set oscar 1) aaalea, fratcafaararsteaitorey
frdtaacarg 1 ate ate, gorareareeara | afrararadfaar agateq
aad satire) Fa arfararadet wed a aa: saa hy-
aoa’ | saafea, watTacaya | a are eae ST 1 wTARTG TAT ?
yareKarared atfsaredat arfancarq ara ca areefaeatera |
gave a yferaat tearracara « aufama  efearaaisetat
qa | aT HfeqerqaTg SIE MITAIATAAT seq Is
gird aed sfrafeaqae [fata] 1 afe arrercreafassa aa
wagina wet qoqre sfeutenetafae aftr: 1 wate
gratifaacatara: faa amerufas'catferar aosiara
eeaanlaa | aeararaisaar sifeear, aarfe atreragreed-

 

saregt—1. B. om. at
2. A.C. D. arfa# and B. E. arfadt before arant
3. A.B. C.D.E. fedtaeat aati
4. D.E. add a before aftr 5. D. safaraem:
6. A.B.C. D, gap : guaran ora
7. A.B. C. greafita

--- Page 313 ---
az ara eaTaTa [ stafirto
afaararaararygrer: aden: 1 atarafeararataagat | vat
a— “aumfattsrrfamad gaiq”, “fant aagemarmn[ar-
reat Cat atacre:” aft aferarart aufesq— afe aa-

agaraat gufaaraat ara, gal ataactfefa: feara fa afa-
aranatsa: 1 wataraarat areataaafefa |

wa ata sea: ‘aa featettsarfafe aera fear
walecarmary | TaaT— maasyg raagfnty Taatary fart |
aafeanagfnag feta sface aufssa-- afe ‘quifaaarac
AAMITAATAAATTAWGAE [GYY¥Roco00] Analrferdyar’:
fantaat asad, aa wdiead: fear zfa, aeanfanraar:® |
ae at sort— afe yqferagetaraaasoa gmfrarmaces waa
afaarra ager aead, dartataasrao = fRarfaft 1 aeaay
aafanranaet afar gTarexard: Swaqurahagamafagatafasa-
[uavaeaelattaet arm, ofeghra frcar. 1 faaqorfiragd?
ferauia scar aafsa— afe graesfadinraafearta aaa,
aa va: falae asanaa: | ae" qeegt eyo fears: Pquiracaz-
arafreagiaitrefaraST][ quo qoyoo faa, ase afear: |

aq faadatastanaca: afaara-qfertuint fase ?
seat — gisarafanragyg: | Beravaawgy: | waa avaea
aufray - ate qoafead: gram araet, aatsta wferarat-
agad feat efa ca afaararqrazger ag caariarradag —
canara Casal PTTL, Fae Tra aTs TheeMTAITA |
qa wT wa TTaVaila star faw=say JTHTt | Ta sfee-
qaaaarta SI, TaaTa saearhe era afrarar wa

 

 

sareat—1. A. B.C. D. saagraafa «Sar:

A.B. C.D. E. faasageasarrag ara
A.D, E. aa 4, D.E.om. qui to aga
B.C. D. om. 47 6. E, weaifiraran:

E. aa for aTaF

E. om. %@ to At, next line.

B.C. qr afar ; EB. afrafar

10. B.C. D. aia: ll. B.C. D. asananats
12. C. ya for gi; E. om, Fai to wed:, next line.

erp aw wd

--- Page 314 ---
yates: ¢ | afutraranfzatta 9a3

aat amare sft vo wares yfearara aia aufaay—
afe yfetvargfagar aad, adisra qfataraaaa area feqaeaer®
fafafe 1 aa qrarcaragreategeacateata: | ae ofsetr yfeaa-
wat ufzar eff 1 aa araasifin aaror:, ‘arar uaa: fearfa
aat af oftaccataaarasa afeates fercar: 1 weariness
famieta | ae weqaqg: 1 sea ca aatentfndseastaraa Tet
fama 1 ae AeaAaeT: |

afsaaacaaay aia 1 aaar— aviseauttr fettaa
aufaeq— [afe] grqafeadgorfaaraa aad, cat waTtseqT-
fava: feaea ofa, afeatamteanfoateat aeaed, agar
a NT aeaeatafesg— ale garsaragaraqcrat| for] wear
aa waxfaaratedice: faara gf afmaraata eats garaa-
Tad 1 xaaratceraraufaiauae +t Ta Tay gay:
arizatrate grqaieraiansa asrgate feaccat yarfrarapata-
weary weseararaat: | weal aUfaned weacarariad—ate
gry eaatraraar asad, aaisdtseteae: Peart erat surfer
eq) aa: garefa—afe gmifsarasagaraar aeaet, aacaerfira-
arafaruegereaaaan: fara aft aa gate garfir-
araat yar: fadtaracfas aa: | aay TATRA TETTAY-
eaeacaTeasea eH sefaqarat BMTAAT WaT: Fastest sia
QIT:, ASATAASSTTAT:

 

eayeut—1, B. adds out of context: wandasf yfenaraaer ag
taurgaadd aarnat Ufarrrataat gra: Beer
wag ofteraad aa wry art a Tawa |

2. A. B.C. maaaasft

3, A. 4a-gap-24 3; B.C. om. arafeaa

4. A. gap for arar uaa: feafa ; B.C. om, the same.
5. A.D. E. asd 6. C. alam:

7. B.D. om. a7; E. om. aaufa ga

8 E. om. am 9. E. fata

10. E. aa: for yrarcarrgerear: ll. E, om. aa

Alo Ato Vw

--- Page 315 ---
qx wreafeatara [ srerferate

aitveraacafrararar arta | aatszrgaray aeeqrattiz-
area sfacr famat dyna aufsacd fead—afe gaara
feaaeinraar aera aaTisdtszafafead: feat geaaAT: | Waa"
aufeaa 1 gat— afe garaadairrearar arsed adtsderaa:
qaaufaafacfad: feat sft, alaaraer arard 1 fda
qaauias QaraaT YMA, Fs WAIT 1 Fal TRITATT-
qieavegeneatercenarainferat amet, garfaaraay  yT-
are, waadiserfqnraar’ 1 qaaat gaa gan aufasartt
HOTTA |

aatfaaraacatceral wardtaed 1 aaat—ate gafrata-
a calscrgaagr aeta, Saat scerfaaraa:” fear eft 1 afasata-
qaatataraacaseaasT gaat | TTT 1 MENA aT A eantfer:
feaa | way? ofamran [aoe |aeerearma ayzarhrarars-
ifranfafeaaianaa | ca weal asad, [a] geaeatfeatas-
TEATTg sae Taraatiaraarsiaadsata 1 Ad: Gawaaqata-
as wear ager winferata frase | weet afar: 1 aai—ate
upfscafeatfacatcuationsad, [aar] .arfrafearfa: fafaia
wag qaearfaa"? ae eara, aatseferaeaterararae| set] vale

garantig— afe gmlaaedteengarn| aeard aat
araraa:” fraeq ofa | wantriacrhaarftaprarageitseng area
aad, ad gsefaqatafan: feat aay? wancargardlse-
rar area arraayferadar faa | eet ATTA: |
art qaasanronieg fata | atafaat wat wale 1

aeat-—1. A.B C. mama oF

2. A.D. ar aga ; E. om. a4

3. E. aa: for yorarvarrgreat:

4, E, ava: 5. E. ants

6. B. om. qarto aead, next line; E. afase

7. B.A: 8 A.B.C. D. tant ag ; EB. Xoronadtezgg
9. E. atsar:’ 10, A. E. om, adit

ll, A.B. C.D. varaa 12. C. qdaq earfee

13. A.D. E. garaa:

--- Page 316 ---
vets: & ] afaarnanfeatia 93%
wats FIT: —
aadaisfanmaraaaa aa: eceafanara: 1

areai at aghast aeag freaai aft ua

afar |

afamraranaarsat qalaesraaaragqada | gerdlaay-
wes atverarafaedd | aaI— yaw weasqagy
eaTTa— wqsow3 | warfacaaay Tadasrataaaar: Fa [frat
srafonieaarmnatia aacatsagaarat ¢ gs wrt cafe
gatare: fra? | aa ase Heat: acaegzatigaaa:, sexe
seed! waa ser aatrayferta faastq) at aa
eaHISANT: | wWaarfacarrad saTSATTT |

BqeTT:—

OTAAATT SAMA PATATATSTAATANT:! |
waa Hat caacsotat gent fageates woraaseTA 21

WMAANT: VWNARGE | Ast TaHosaTAT weeey, chaseT
QUIS I

araeatia geraraad yaaa’) asataaraar: Fat ahrat
aratqaraearatitarrataa | qa ge ant saad

 

eaTeqai—1. A. om. ward 984: to aifa efa, two lines below.
2, A.C.D. E. sifaeaca
3. A.D. E. sata for fare
4, CE, §asa:
5

A. B.C. ausafatta: Yeqod; E. wanarg: garfawararrareaa: |
fara fraassarnfacarfaar Frater: 1 aexearfe

6. C. adds 9%4 and E. atta before aTafaaraar:
7, Mss. we for Y

--- Page 317 ---
chad wreafeataa [ wrafeato

HITHTTAT AS HSTHTT VIISRIE | Sfesetanayegm = AET-
aay |?

maar weaata gale aemtaartfacdigea Fula —
afe gaxfafacnfataafearar asad, faat] warfaatazfat
facarfa: faaea eft) aeet aroT:, AT srzatfeqfis werAvaeR
aaa | aaa aeasaaa ver grefafacar avafaat wafer [Tar]
ciara airare:, afar arafafacarat yoraire:, we WeAA-
aeafacar: | wana carta aeatadtseuarar seme? ala
aq? “faataagarafacararritceranrr art: faaria-
Tegra AIT aT ATTSIM:, | Fa" [amor] facat far] 1
Waa WA:—

afag: wird witfa a: afer: feaftateatenmety® |

wena grasa BAAIAT: A TeIT WIN
afa ng it

[ arqafagtaaqsainfa |
ary frazarat aararfeTTaTE—

aay arya azia fragae vata zy |
fast sramyfud Red aa fafafeseq lo Ul

 

wareat- 1. A. C. RETHTT: VWREsRo | B. FAFHIT VULEsvoRe |
E. Beat: acafaarraereggah CBWLEs do
2, A.C.D.E. wrongly add here: 9414 3eqt:—
gaa aistraaraaaaa a a: wOeahraward: 1
areat a aefacd aead fasrat anfa uv afe
B. puts it at the correct place ; see p. 195, top.
A.D.E. wat foram = 4.._—«#£E.soom.. fa
A.C. avtee-gap-2 maiaa ; B. waterag sited
C. om. fasta to 77, same line.
A. B. om. Ba ; C. gap for Get
A. D. E. afaafeaft; B. afta: feat ; C. afera: feafer
E. wernt 10. B. weaq; C. afer
ll. C, alga and D, atga for atga

yo wo NAM LY

--- Page 318 ---
aite: ¢ ] grat aerfeasar & ass

xfer, waat vfaata 1) trader a saroafaigad —
eefeaao zeasar:’ [atafsato, ¥] sft 1 tora argarett
agy 1 aaa wae aaa ATT adfafa | aafa faraqet wate
faoam 1 TeaTASa atl Paonia fred af wala, veg Area:
ataray | saat a ‘arferarared frat’ [srafatte, qo] afa1 faai
gauging feod ad fafaterq frgniag at ae ceagiirate at
Fara, aema fred at ata zarary ) aaraeta-fand-aftertat
[ar] = [xfaad] aqa-fag-earai [asifr] uu

[ guna agfaasari a |
aqaraal feast sare —

frog ayaze aeararea at faceTTT |
werat weet ara feral aeqarany | Il

aaa feed ag aq grant: ager air mERTATH aTA |
Went ararege aeeTaray | fe Tq? BTA | FEAT Aa Ter Ae-
Haissincshtarsaedt wales, Tear gr wea | TF
PaTSET TATRA TAT: [vazoo0o] | Wade Ha-Aaa-raz-
afaarint WATT | HEATH Y ATI: Ta Ca A TeaHlat: |
aufaseg fretalaT SaTeATaT: —

araraig: again’ anit aq Hat ATA |
ae TaeEY Treat aemiatea vara:
aaty aaeayg aaeaing a fag
uaa add agarit watia au
[ waerfe:, 9. §¢-v0 |

eft | saya faqeratrermaqanafraat: [qexsooo] |
aaa § fagereuarrcaaarat. [ 922gooo0 |] 1 sTTCTATT
faqaraurataaacaaag: [sgvooo] 1 afasurt fareraqrara-
amUAaar: [v3zooe] | aarfaatt fararacrarayaraHaaay:

 

wqreat— 1. C. om. @

2. B. om. ata at aearTay 3, EB. agai

--- Page 319 ---
445 wreafearn’d [ stefrare

[¥RRcooo |i fe Gata qaaH—gemertier Perro Farah?
smears car sfarda, sretfera aarenranraraia sfararfsarta
warts ? aarenre sfearfa aatcare) afe’  gerna fea
afearit gaoresernift osftapeeara, «= aver afagaet ver:
Maga ATITHETATCA Tey HIT eeqeAG | TTT
aamraaarary farerzerarmscagagaar [zcccoco] eat
eager aan fafzareaaverfrasfaarat grratiaagaeal WEAR
War a avart 1 mada ofsaar zardtafy ganeat areqararar
aacerernt oafaa wert 1 oafe ga: anda sarhat sare
aft aarorefe gaat sant fageracrarayeaRaaAay:
[3X¥oooo], mat arta aafaceqaqsa 1 aeaTe ‘aareqral
shear fa goon 1

acerat aga aa feael aegarary) gegafafe ata
Wears aT aq aterad | Tasiaty aan afs saat.
feaavart vata 1 aq ararft “dtefaé: ag freer | way ?
aterfors:—

aeRgraaangag aE fae: 1
tila anagarat asgrcrafaet war
[ aTaamtat, «qo ]

aft asaqrterd gant feaaragey | wa asctat ae
aqamatfaft 1 aa atag faaaa 1 srafns:— ‘agaaradea-
weqq vam fag feafaar’ aa caaciaragdnat aearat
agen aaat ata fea gia [atafaaa ] 1 aanacafevagen-
gfrar weaaeseat a siete | seat q— age aeqrautor
van fers, aaa agamarfafs earaafatta: | gear
arecaiaragarat Ararat, wslatagea aa’ fara fa fea

 

sareat—1. A. B.C. gap for faasaintfy sardtfa

2. A. B,C. om. aazarai afe ; D. aeat afar
E. om, Weaq
B.C, aad 5. B.D. aa for aq
B. D. hapl. om. dtafam: [-*-drerfaa:], next line,
, AB. C. fafgay 8. E. wat

yaa FS Bw

--- Page 320 ---
yeite: & J geatacarfagriaart: 4ae |

fagtaq io at qafed aad ararcafaraaimat aearacfaf ?
airfare sacar |

Bal aaa @ AAT: zat Efe |

[ ffasto,y Jus

[ seafaearfagafaara: |

sea froa ta faotarargss airfare —

seaftat garg yeaUeTahiat gard = |
HEY FACT |IATSSTTIeA THAT AN Ul & Il

weafaot aTa afer srfirarargamddtateadtegasiace
THe sealqolaay. | TET A TAT aMaq | yaeq vet BMT I
ga cafaferta 1 aearePaserrsarrycataet farerauarager-
WrEATAT: [240000] 1 semeaafat gad a1 qearfeeqaa
seafriararracerarntara asiaft | wear qaraaer Feat.
fate eag@at wate 1 afery orfarargaaidtiatendteardiaed @
aratrtaaa BIT: | TEA aT TMT grea qeates? faaaraxtatT-
PAWFTIAT: [2GgRoo0o | |

Us Y— wey neq quaraaea qeategena 1 ger qatier®
WET TTA STAT | MAAS Tl Tal TAT eT STAT | -|TAT-
STTITATT ZTAGHT: | wry? He eft TAME | gardears yA
agaia aft 1 sftae gaterere— ‘gegeaia’ | RegoaT leq TeAT-
quad seafeqraiantgargerararat wana eft 1 aT
fegead sgearfefa ? aq a agarared gufucafafsar | aay |
vata | sftaenvadafaine gate: | aaat— wavsarht
agra: [xog], farararia gael saaqeagergaan:
[Riokse] 1 aexeq faaarania gd qeaaTgiasigetzenr:
Lraexery] 1) canatyrate

 

 

sarem—1. EF, daar 2. D.E. acaret
3. C. ara 4, D. EL afaa:
5. E. adds wai @ 6. A. B.C, add here @

--- Page 321 ---
R08 srafearm’ [ stafrate

sa gua fe wary? geaat— sqaqaariaraatied
afaate Tera HATHA saa) Fe: ganfaaaaal Aagrt-
gfagte afageatat agai avaar wert aaa aracatat arate |
sat A—

dafaaral aa fagacasifat sqaeT |

aataiad aatfareta asia: |
afc |

frag Tiara qerarerfafera—Birag eae TTT
fRafaeda’ cents 1 waar seaeatfafrarecafroarataorerargen-
aot aanaed fadatafa 1 eed gaiaretenaRarretegeataiaaa
gfaqaa sf? seaa— Herareafda,? cenrfergeaaraaeaeges-
aro graaiter gafaaer [at] atsaarTeeat sfaraea 1 taatfeat
"qeqiual afeafeta TeaAH:—

fadifactafacea gga wa g Ulett gat Haq

aat feaarararg saat quer aatafeataat a A yu

asd’ guid fararacraragerpaaaraa: = [3R¥oooo ],
feat o uefataafearemaqeat: [995335924] |

AAAISAAIT: HTT —- seafeot qed 1 seTaHlegeataa,
gadtaa gad: | ar ar seatret ? agafeateerearaay | at gt
faued araacatat eeaTe— FMTIT | qoTt gfeaat wel afa
gry | asa’ aaaaada ofeype, qenraafery AIST WeeA"
ya: ae air: ataata | Tea Brea BaA, TETTA: | WaT
aaataot gud wt grata gaeerrattent gare | ufmren fers: |
aed guea qaAt, TET BATT Hea Tay EA: | |IAT aifeatsaae
TOAAUMA FIA THEI Taratfadisaeearrad aeqa: | [aarart a]
Fern set) AaTaTafs AMAA: |

 

een 1, BE. sfaraatea 2. B. Hgrarter

3. A.B. C. D. aeg -gap- af%
4. A. B.C. asife say 5 C. a4

6. DE. uafeara qsaagea

--- Page 322 ---
we: qo ] ardwzacrete: R04

aia: greaiarafiquigeameraaa  fasracd
saala— gear, werdegfecay: 1 aTaa— seat: Fezeq gar
utaat at wiaserfanices sar, car ayfa Herayfarerstaa,
aracaes Utares aarafata | caeteare UlTweae Feargafaarat
qT, aaa Regt ua: safaris
attanteacares dara: | aT ete fadtararare afar
Yea FANART FT YTAT | Wea HTaraa |,° fadiagetafece-
Heareraia AT aT qaTaT arse Adtarafafsceteargesae
qaaaeaege:, TF wydsrrreaee, garaaat + YT |
AAI STAT |

magragiea oar — acatqeagafaeitgenrgsqar:
wafaar: | udfeararareraf agrt sfarderq 1 aear— qdeq
wat eee Una” waqeISaraterd, aa Bea sqraigen:
au, Afaes AeTAT | ART aTset uaa: THlAfameara facaTeT.
se omer: [aarfe] earareiges:” [asi], asa afeaes |
gor ataraft | carardged qarusafaat wale) gar ‘[searsfa-
wos: | [arafrato, 9] geaent arfearat aaa ne

[ widvestasta: |
ATAAAME: CAT AHA ATT ATE —
Teast Tegan saMaeTITTA TATA! |
safrar fagtaeaate ay seaalscta: tl g° UI

eqeat—1. B.C. geaig 2. C. yatat sionaat
3. D. adds here : weareeradtiera ga afer: aa: gaeft ata
weed eg Atag YcoA STAT | aaa rgafaarat aay
Taat naeaafefete 1 wa Gyar) Hera FAT yg
A similar passage occurs also in Raghunatharaja’s

commentary.
B. om. af ywat to Featgew, same line.
C. ufefag 6. A. gap for aa; B,C. D. om. az

A. B.C, D. E. agar

Mss. read sfawosaged | The reference given by the author
isnot correct. 9. D,E, om, atheaai

ons

Atio Ao Re

--- Page 323 ---
Rog nrerfiparar’ { anrafeate

. weqaearat fee: | afte: sear: ofeeqory gery: | mat saitat: |
mar afery sre, sata: eafearear: | amen gaara: 1 AXEA Tay:
SUTT:, TA Aa faTRear seta: | safer fawfereaar: 1 Fahirchitar:
caterer fararferzear: | meni afer are 1 aa wera: wetter: 1

aes araratiee: TRATATATAY ay qwecgenfi-areda-
fareg-saftea: Sarai aad Wereay— Tey emeqst fagq-
wile eft? seaa— aaadea arta ofenta gamfeearatai
STASHASATTA AT WII) aT z arrarariasaere aaqela:
areal famed. daafta . safer aga TAUHTT | aut
give aware yueacarnreqeaavaa: [32¥o000] }
Td a afrgnen | caearfeet VIaAaeaTaT aesararfassyarecy?
7 adea: | freq arPberEraat sat: ater aed geyerat-

faeaaistiraecer: |

weary ‘qeeqsaray ete’ soatranfracas |
manga: — SATAN: aem: | AAT Aq: USA-
qansiaa eff sagme: gaat Pera WIZ VTITATAT
at ‘gages agree’ [stfarato, v| sfa garfe
vet feaeane: | garit g aaafraeqaernd afagnree: frat |
gufisiqaae: | wear aftad, ufawee = wat: aa:
qaaea Hees fretirarg fasters | gaat ewnTahs aA Taser
eqearnta wfea aferonerefefiad taatararafate |

magic get neneay— afe amercia wernt
Hamfalsrmo art wea Prat ef, wed aNfrarrar
IT | Met areafagine ceanfererarefats: |

waa Uren ToeaMatr eae | tat afte gal
44 aart’ eft | cazanfa seedy | aaret— seaserad fe aTa 4a-
qaasfaraataararces araarfacatefierey aoseteteaey at ater: |

 

eareaT—1, A. B.C. EB, afaenz 2, A.C. D.E, fae ieraed
3. A.B. C. fafa:
4. B.C. D. om. sf to aera, same line,

5. B. om. Ta: to afa, next page, line 2; C.D. om. RT:
to 47, next page, line 1,

--- Page 324 ---
wate: 9° ] MAAS HTT: Rod

a gmat guefaant: saTisarydiasarcert CF wafer |
qisecfrariedutas feat, vae— ‘afe gazfatwadfcara-
agers’ aeaa aseciaaas: featfafa sat asad ag
aseatfagfina afesrar eft cfarrroreqarfeaaTar aa STAT TEAS |
qeMIstagaarafatrsraaaieratsetT. TEA, ‘Sagaeriserie4y
cfaarrearirarararay afaeatea |

gaat avifahareina aufeq— afe aqameida

IT: TTT: TA, TAT afrorneiia fear sft
Ast ATT: | NATS TATA A HAT TT TEAST AMAA TTT TATE
feaat: 1 It wscarfagint sfesrer: | qaqaaieerftzat aT
caunranfaanaarn ferataat wafer waes WeasTM TTT
aeafa: wird aqTt sfraieay | “Tea —

Bil ARAZATSHRALT Fear

auifa weragaiganraged: |

gan vat afar aeTTATa

arat wafer feaatea gasafeet: |

dea Temat: TATA
qaistdaginay Ets HITE |
eainategiafa: sorafeaditet
daa qaanemge’ fant uu

AT THHFATHAAEAG
qzaisatageg” faartfzara: |

a afaat zagag aay aut
weareqaha vfaont sft farraat ou

 

sareqI—1. B. om. vfa 2. D. EB. dene
3. C. qoqe 4. Mss. ax for 44
5. A.B. C. om, 4 6. E. seared:
7. E. om, aaeat and indicates the verses quoted only by the
words : tafeatfaat 8, B. eat

9. Mss. read egal 10. Mss. read faqay

--- Page 325 ---
Row wrefigarart [ srefieato

vfanferamteararant Asa aeet:
aaanfaemesaiaad arftafrear |
wafa aeafase mtedtd ani
afe aafaeqg acaRatafeerq un eft |
[ waTeTEHATT, 9. 22-RB, WERE |

wa sesemearqara adish: atead 1 aaa ? uate
aaa —

agfaafeararn gage vsiset
fafeargafce! arengrearfzy |
aa gana ated weit aaa
afaaanfafrant WA araisz

eacat feaaren: azar fgafrat faafesra t
anfeat ogeat waaranara fafacet: uv aha |
[ rerarentiay, 9. 20-39 |

va aa: fae: | [aeare wary ]* sreraindg yaar:
sfarcaa | atteargafrry arm gf) wt qatar: fag: 1) qat-
ein ger |aeatiacad qeat |

ay wast vert gafeaaainagay 1 grease: afte-
waarafra: gafafeaar: | aad etisemenT weed, Teta
vfafeaaa frara af aufsaearta [ast anorferst waft] 4
ufaarafrcarmat sarfaneattery Tra: | ast Fat: qa-
Neat: | Tat: Gans @ayeraray ws, grefafeaarai
aaysraaia sracafe: agate, sadly atecafaea: fa.
eaeT TSAI ATT:,” THEA Tet qaferawsatisaey TaT-
eqreat—1. Mss. read wear agy 2. Mss. read aaa

3, C. Taher

4. B.C. D.E. repeat here the previous passage : ‘gforat
qrefataran:, addtcttscagarat yeaa 7’
B. cad; DE. ef tq
Mss, read Art

nu

--- Page 326 ---
rete: 99] an fewreracairae: oR

wear frera— aexrat facar atfawfa: facatfaasear: aa-
qguar:, vtreq facar vatang facarfaazaar srgafrqan;,?
gerd: wy faansseaqgefarrsam:  afaafr:,
maser’ ferred frcarseremagear: wfreazan,! qatar
frat aa facarazfarsarart: mitetar:, wife aatara
frarveagaatn Aaqaeguat: 1 wd aafafataaqiferaa-
afaia: qaigit qrta, qaqasafacaiiasa dutta azar
wa stag @eygata faust, at geqaafacar: 1 gatera
fare: sania adie: ga: at, gaa agie:, way
eqying gla) waeatqagaad we aqayta wifead yefea
aaaraTeaeaiaa i qo A

[ qaifasraraea fade: ]
BTA Tea eer Tara eA ATS —
quaiaaeaan: at wraea Say: |
PIASTAAAN TATA IT ITU -2e II

gt y ay a arava feqary gradarafaara:,© va aa TaaT:
ZITAT Ras: | eafacae— dagewd: 1 Sat aTe:, Ter [7]
gaa: cat:, ar qralaarjer a atfe:, [a] afer gat,
TMNT Fayraeaarar: Xa AIG TAA: | AT T AT Aaya:
Tat TF Ca aA TAA: 1 TEN aM Aagaae: Tacha.
aaareg | Feaig | meavat agidtarraearq safectafear—

WAR areraenin” facia’ caster g

 

Vaatat Talat aguit awe az
saveat—1. Mss. read Saegy facet: 2. B, Paerq for fara
3. C, wee 4. BOC. tat: for tat:

5. D, warararat -6 B.C. om. aradara feaan:
7. B.C. D. defective : B. ataar® ; D, araaraqeait
8. A. B.C. om. feetaitt

--- Page 327 ---
Rog wrafwarag [ srafearo

ateaer sani @ featait aaa: 1
atderint gaa J agate eT a

warexearerind aa fgeitait fawraat: |
DexeaiN gat  aregETiet BAF 11

aal aararafan geetfacnfeaa:: |
JAUATHTA AT TTA: THAT AAT

efa t

wa anint safacfagefrar | seat? atsaat fara

nrafeaarael ofa fas ca waa: | read eara— ea aut Tate
afaant Gatfata:? dfgnerterfaset | Aut sfaar at, 7
qwaeay | aeaTe ar qeaeag! ATH | ofrsr vafaeaeat: TET
aferdita | caait a | arear— gong afaagrrstars: Tait
ddnrateaaram, sage: [setlasaevat fafa: | gar 7
aay aoe Hafare: aararatararat watea:, areetaa-
qeqasat frat: | cat 4 wameasapargay— tard TAGoTS aa
waa ei aaa, wandtedaarg gr at carte ta |
faguan agetat frazaq—

way aEararartatinreat J Ataf |

Spaperaaata: wer rare qreatia: 1

afte |
grata sagan: wacataad fesraad |

sarat secaay tage! 4 yaaiedl are: eaara Ttratea:,
aa a ae Yaad os sfeg:, eoaray—

STATATATE AT: ARATKAATAAA:”

 

aia |
earen—i. B. om. aatat to fea: 2. E. wet for dat 4
3. D. sarenarfate: 4. EL Tarra
5. D. om. #4 6. B.C. D. om. fagesa

7. ALB. C. om. QRAPIAATT TT;

--- Page 328 ---
aie: 19 ] aotfarprertaren fied: Rod

qaleai—ad’ fagesatatgd Tq EAUAATANMT HATA HTA-
arti  gararaecare® aITST NOTA [TATRA aqaatt | qatar
gard dacat sha Theatere: | aeySeaa “YA TT ATA ATF afag:’*
afa, aa sae aaeda Bg’ aa: | att A aa: HMTFATAT-
STATA: FTITTT: | qacyera—

WAFATATAMTERTA: YRAKATATA: |

ata, meager TaTs: | ARAATATHTATT secaral aTeq:
fa gaara | SaTFAT AZT: | gamed [7] fe araee araaiearry |
afaary gacsaeaar afters ofa arirat ara geate |

araea— aaraa waa a? Haraate AaATaeat ATA
aqeq art Wel: FJ: |
WATS WaAwat:—
mre g gaasfaaenqe ga Tait Arama? eerg™ |
afa aaatfenta: | gat ga: grerfantaeaer Tt: aerdisafeodt
wate 1 Yad fz saat oadt—
wat ga dacater Tea Uae Tega Tora TAT |

ete: [ate] geor[ sferee ]rfenta: cara, azar wabragerer Setar
BeTat wate, aga aetanre: eae? Fa: ? Hegeat qrerareat
}

 

zareat—1,  B. gay; C. at

2. A.B.C.D. cart (-gap-) Tat; E. Tq suede

3. D. BE. ag 4. C. atanfaa |

5. AC. aga 6. A.C, aq for Rtg

7. A.B.C. defective: AB. Mra fa aa; C. mar fara

8. Mss. defective : B, a aaa ; A.C. D.E. 4 AH
Ysared ATTAT 9, E. araea for Wat 4

10, E, weqaat il, D.E, are:

12. C. om. ua fg to wafa, three lines below.
13. A. B.D. E. aat off for araer aft
14, C. aafa

--- Page 329 ---
Roe mrerfrerrnt [ srafsato

BCPA ATT: TH, TAA TTA tal araer],’ sfaqcHcorrfz-
arateg | Tat Hag avatht geqat ara: ana fa |
TEAR -—
Reyat Terra waz |
ate |
weySy
(ane) amreurreran aeqiaftanredta, a dfgear aeved

MITT-TAITA, 99.4.9.9
sf [ OTA, 99.9.9.9]

ate qaaral ara: aienead aar a aarseqrararearat
Ufgear sean a frat i cere Fatty frat att
grat, Tet teat aadacat darastara | aay carcaleg aeray
sfaqa[ saa |* aeaararrarear aewar gsaa, + Ufa) ag
aeauftiaeatata [Fa,7] | aaardea anace ar waaay
WaT, T Aaa | BAet TARTS saragiaregt srdtarat
qaraeaararea afaeafs 1 aa: semqersfrrsqerqentag
TOA AA Wea Maas ATT. sata |

Wasa

ahsazqetse® tat: ware 1
aia t

wary [999-43] Mt Tamt 1 aarteae: Hem: [a]

aq. | AUST eda —

HTT BIS Falter at aqeat: |
Raa Sorta mACaTy | TAT: HO:, MTT: YA: | HTTATEGAT-
TaeT Tae a stafate: satin T Bec, eaT ay geapar],

 

wareaT— 1. Mss. read ata: for ATTY 2, Mss, read atseat
3, A. B. Tene 4. Mss, read yafa
5, A.B. C. defective: damaent
6, Mss. read att for ay

--- Page 330 ---
wre: 14 | gmfaerenraafean: Roe

aeqsgaatiania gid | qa ‘quaderafaaat: aa TANI Wa-
are Tat |

qaiettaagacat rem | gardai Fal gaatieat safe |-
eared BTAEATAATTIIAY Sas — gsm: | Wa Plalseala-
quifectafed:, amare: saat sit | mMeaTeaT TeaTE: | aaa
arraaniacass ofesfera: | afe sraeatfa: caraa: fe eng f
mg— warcatarar static, zeqg oalaifz: sare sie
aqenre grt ‘Hratsaearaca’ she |

aad grteafzedagrared thafert Fare — aeregatat aa
gaa art a wealfe | aagaeqaad afaceaeg | ATE wi
[oifnetiaerqara: 993] xeat ag: guaragaraeaad ATA
ade | va qadedeasiaa af are wat ararfexraa: azaiiata-
apie, gepareay ai aarlea, qeufefa i Fat at Ta
wer. gaventansaedl fafadgurerar gaeatieicta | at wat
aera @ att, gareeaeafargeeat: ? Aa ate: | FeTa atTeqT-
quae dia aT: Tey AG | Aa Tar A aei weak 7 AAT.
qin: | q alaacanaal: daadregaaedsaaal TATA |

wet grease aaa ogee Ee | werd AHA et
araeatfaeaa Teed | TAT
aia aferada saratanat sft: 1
aenta daratl ATETZ aTgetes: WMATA i sta

 

amea—1l. A. B.C. defective : Yat a-'aat
2. EL aaa ule 3, D. EB. eqagrara:
4. A.B. C. 399i 5, E. gat for wat
6. This verse has been quoted by Bhatta Bhaskara Miéra
{1488 A. D.) in his bkayya on the Teittiripa 8rah-nana,
Astaka I, p, 238 (A. Mahadeva Sastri’s edition) :
gfenrgafa aad sarttaratsfyet |
EAT GATT HART TELIA: TACT U
Bhaypotpala ascribes the verse :
afar afera me g wararandtsh ge: |
sen RATT ATT aTeeTeTIST Aas

to Rsiputra. See Byhat-samhtta of Varahamihira, edited
with Bhattotpala’s commentary wivrti by 8, Dvivedi,
Part I, p. 181, Banaras, 1895,

Ho Alo x9

--- Page 331 ---
246 etafearat { srafeate

qaeriaarcamrestaeatia: tfeafert: | ate a Ca aeart) waft —
‘cararafad searearag saa’ fa, ‘yased wa afeaa’ sft, ‘srr
afar neafeqarg arent’ [wer |’ searfa 1 ata) ated waiter, afeaT
aT, AaAEaTTaMalfereqea wept: 119

{ vant aanfacaq |
Tart aatiasawsArate—
Tea Aalearal wqesed Ret aahmAT |
feeaaq aaciela ae ana: RITA 1 92 Il

meeat gatearat aTfecraNint TeeaT wer TeaHEAT TTTahea,
qmanenqeata strat rary tag peaTy Tegel |
[feats]? gataanearat var: gafearat yecat qealra ?
sara — agferarsruaracaaalaara gat: [YoRRQooos | 1 de
earfedaanearrary corq fe afe ? war ofarrfeafa ? eear—
‘aqiase: (fast, ¢ | aft wa wa gata aTaaneaTgertit
aan mardifa sar? ‘afe eqa-gqeaaat: Tara
WIN Far: HSoTS [Tar] swezai qates: feava ef 1 ofertas
yeaa: Ga: weatata [et] eppgearnaragint gracata-
weet | we aaa faaseuga:® cara | aa: gah
qaar waa sfaea sear area [aer] seaqeadtia Fa aa-
Weal AaaHeAT AAT |

fear anafefiry | fafa ad faorq, gated: 1 at
qaigeameaa gratadaa ? Saeara fafa aeaxat verte aT

 

Brq—1. B.D. E. area
2. Mss. read of for feaatratiz
3. A. B.C. om. 4aq to f&, next line.

4. A, B.D. gap for afe eqy-gedzsia and C. gap for fa
ePT-YeAwseT, same line.

3. A, C. frat for a7 6 D, witarfaret trem:
7 D. sf
8 D, om, ama to THafefay , next page, first line.

--- Page 332 ---
wie: 73] wrgrort ererey eres yr TeTTE ST a4

wafa, aa [feet grqad aa] fear aactfefary 1 vara: afer:
augfehr, mianrpeterd: | wafhaqead 2 aq a fra
cfefraaaararnfnfs aaa seat aiefaairacare BT HEAT
wag ? weat— faazers ata’ faaeuretafrata raat
ara faafafa | wa: ceRrErTAsaataie | Aa qararraaay
gfraraata, qreray feaehatras: areqaatee. |

aed roca: | ger [rear] HET geaT | ara TAT Fa
seat ait daze araeca’ aera fa sabeele canearat aeaua |
qaar—aaaa ama eanerT aad [car] gram: ftafa
QReal AeAT | WaAT—TSATEaM TT ATATARSAT aeTs TART ATT:
fefata @ReaT aeT 1 CA ATT AAI(eTTAT: | HEAT
ert HeraaaTH — aha [qa afd: aa oa cary Bea’ MATA
sara [a]xeargearit aterarft ef, naar feat
ware aaATTAT ferafetere aft, areatat yfaratt gat
meaarat wert ferafeartert 1 TAT ace weatat ASATATEI
aq —ate canearataa aro Tae TAT ataaiaa: fafarearigat
ahmed, aa: gat — qataret emaeat wera fafata 1
aaa: Ta TTAS TUHIT:, [aot sia: 1] aa THATCAVTETRA-
PUA SEATS faa [afa latoarfa qoare: feea:, [Treat
arate aTaart:, afer |store: 1 [sae a |?—

areateeat qlerge Get aT TATA Ag
TABAUMAT TATE RSA ATTA Ul
eft \ alae exer ainda eaqemrateriaied ATTA
waft WAR ul
[ agvat annfaaa seateraeat ]
AMMA TA AMGHEAT ATTA TST TTA —

HUSAIN Tela Ta WAT AH: |
qufearq alat aera RET TATA ll 23 Il

 

 

wareqi—1.  B. om. 44 7 ?, A.B. C.D.E. wear
3. B. warm; E. 74 4, A.B. C. faa
5. B. Wt:
6. E. reads weacrentfaaratad and breaks off abruptly with

Ada and does not contain ‘the rest of the commentary.
7. B. wafer; C. ara wa 8 B.C. Taieard
9, A,B, D. read TR 4 10. B.C. D, wagreard

--- Page 333 ---
242 mrerfererrett [ stafirato

HUSAACTATEAT (TIT T Taesas MVSAAETA eal aT HT
ger |ft sexi: | swaearfeetaa aveceorerafata:, vecfrtaer
qareaq | BIN Faraeataagqeras 9 wwsaeqedad war ?
Beai— srs ea eaafeac: | arargnest exafeqararaat ar
aqafeaa ar aaadtadt | aearagearfe[eg:] ear) aaafea
‘amaraa: mavay’ | areafeate, gy |] aa wearrartate
saafeqta® aeafe 1 aq awa qat— aadargefe azure: Teahy |
faagey | wast wernassecactere | cache carseat aeReT
TeTaare eHenagefer geraa[are gwaTet| 1 gta aaafe
ee: TAT gray aafeqaia Aer sexaaisha eqeqTee ET
wavs gata, safefeatt [Araeas |? 1 Tea Arar TAT

wa Ga: gra wat Santer: qatqearaitat Hears —

ada Atheaaray asada [ ateit]
HATASEATAA ACMTEA Taq: aH ui ST |

qa° gsad) afe qearrg aearh yee: carsaree [atari]
qieaar fafata gai [a] aargreread, qeaaer[aat |fearrated-
faat ciinreat aeta? ma fagearest a aemraeaa ef Fa
Tl ale weed qatar agaish: | wesa qermeareqafera-
caegaraaaet: gare Fa ea! A A BeRRe WaeaT Wray
teeter aa afaar grad | wef wave: earetarfa wees aa
faraey Hath: aHAIATAT | TAHT Baa eft Targa
SATETTETT

wreaiety geri we | ete eather aaa geal Pay?
Tact HvsaHa aaateqag | salen aiat queasy agrTVsT AgaT
ara wazae: geal | araeTHEcHeaTAVSa ThA gerafesel,
aay a [qosattt cagear fastarfa] 1 aaar— arxar faaa-
qeeqa wafer aaa wed Tafa, gayscaa: fafaaa

 

earegiI—1, A. B.C. Hapl. om.: qose [*'aIsa] Tareq, two lines

below. 2, A BC.D. feat
3. Mss. corrupt: A. B. C, D. ferat (B.C, ar) wat
4. D. Az: 3» A. B.C. D. art

6 A.BC.D. da

--- Page 334 ---
eetey a¥-qy |] farrwemg tearitaracraged cerearafeaietare 293

aan, wit: fart ade[ta, geleq atetenfa: fafeage:,
adeqeeg fauna ad: fafsagifzfa 1 waved Partaeorear aaa
TEATAT, Wal: SASATAT: |

ay afe qeqnzareat arTaTdat geamae Ta egeaeagt
gma: asada a afag fear: cag aa [ate] atsranaaa
faanaa: egeatast afefacaraad atattated safes afenfercar
ameag: | aeaig faeaweareat aft wer alwaTaa Geanaa
waft 193 1

[ farateatg usardlameragcay |
mearaAcqHecare Ufaartfacar agetiscat gfa aeeg-
eateracagate—
wey fe queaseq nels AeeaTT TTT TAT: |
SU Hada Praaear: RTA Ul 22 |

aed mostser uma: ef aves wgTa:, Cay sar weTT, Fac
g fawrta agar: | daa — wet Hala a ASA AVEASTETATATT TfT:,.
ofeqaarain aat:, aausararm facat gfa, earg cary Beaty
salfararaer Geacatq 1 4¥ Ul

[ aenearafeafasa: |
aearargraatsa | feata? ja ahaa —
WAT: TATITTSAMSGAT TTT: |
maa yfandhyar BAsaeAT Wey I

anfa satdifs, oferta 1 aqraa: eter, ae
qeeafa:, aatsyree gcatfe 1) qarmera aft Ooi aetaravat
As: | Reheat a “qa’-wedl ageaay adara gard sfrrete:
tet ga fegar | ameaea| array dea ned qued, afer ferat
ameaeat 1 varmaea qfateft | aatsaat—aar qa ward We

 

sureti—1. B. adds fa here. ' 2, ACBL C.D. feaa
3. D. om. FF .

--- Page 335 ---
Rye mere frara’t [ srefratts

aaatfn, aar tama gfe) aersdisety agastarter caefegua-
faqurematy watt Tat SATA Y:, TET soft carg i ta fasrad 1
mentg? waarrenataat gee, sate arate, faenq] waa
agi aife, yea: ) aeata aw —
aginzeageantia: faa: waraa: FAA:
agfg adevadad: waar ait gid |
[ ata, » |

[aed fant acaat] gefasfscat, wrorrdeatqenttga-
cfafaaga arstqetateeraiesaicges [afaerd Aart | TeraT—
a jaseanesd arfa aafa, aaeaaiia went weaves |
maqata qefagiafs qesdt aera, ratezaT[sveerer | <hr
wa ofeert: sre Sefra:—aashe career aaem TAANE THIVAZ-
gfe ugaaaara wae [To 242 | RcaThear WTA |

at qeqead—— Geawereal OT TIT TaTTaTaes THT Tea aT
guftarac: | faeg aan eteraa: | wat gofa reat
aeanfatyssiad, aearranfteg gufefe 1 fqeneeafaearaeat
fqsaiaa, afsarenfacaraezet [glefifa 1 waite ate steer
yelaneaar mieqagariaharerasttaaraisheareat geal Tay TATA,
a aay | arash a, sfaatanfacatatereat year agar
yaeta | waa sereaistafager: seas, Tah aera
ger: yfaatanfaeare aeaaett 1 getHerierafeaartes
sarap faa 7 Ca | aaa — Beulalatasaret A CATT |
qarranish a GeTHeaeraferacara Beat 1 Tey “ATATAE:
wagat’ gears FESTA Ul YY I

[ megiufanfariaary |
pragra lean fasta rarare —
TIT ATM WATT AMAA TAT: |
tamara ated aaleaieaae: | 28 Il

Wa AS: wavaaTeqerTaatsty aeaT Taeeey ate EAH,
Aaa aq 1 od va Ata TATRA | TTT

 

waTem—i, B.D, aeaq 2 A.B, C.D. aaarat

--- Page 336 ---
wate: qs | sfaerenfafiat agnfrfaecerd Rae

wagazey Hreaerat faqarat FAeTa: HTARI, TATHTRHeT, Tat
wafeearig 1 va gitar wafer araq qaeorateana sf crear
SIT: | TasaTaleanatadiaa oefa gasiem | aR
agianfaaraara: | arergher fe ary aeauarafaata Fret: | aT
q faa feat faaarfana wafa sfarden. sad 4 rafsean-
wae —
anfergarguarratea aaa: SElTaATy |
#teroealesarfanisstr areca Agqiat: 7 1

wa feaarfxaeqatears aqnraigatfeaacatfaoaatateag ats
maagal, a: ttareasfatea: “arama: waae geatie TeaTsaqut
faqaifacia: 1 aaat— wisaeagd. gai feaarfagia, gqaiq
aieagd:, armregres safe | waadat AT ararfaqt
geubraeqiaacaear: | way? [wee ater a a] saafeat
afag: a ararfadt aciferes 1 qitanigar 6 qc seq: gata: |
matt wate: qateantaratar: sfarder:\ Ha? zz farar-
aqaifaarisht ATTITAAITET TAHA
samme gakegara adie atfsat 1 aaarstafeceg
aqegy aera fardzatearareer Fawias she

aq wfargicamare oaresaht weara 1 aeaTgTAy |
ATATEEA —
wrdifed  SALTTATTAAATNT
aaeqafaad osycafra ada: i
[ aqeqit:, 9-4 |
qa aarasatopemmatar aura: ASAT: | Fay
mer; agafecnerar safe arefeeraert: wara afa | ta:
Beard qateattera get 1 48 1

[ sfanewafataa sgnfaireany |
ud var: Sleaerset sredifa [4 aad] gacafreraaTE—
PRATTAATSAT HAleT TF HET TIATTT |
aaa Wawel Fa AteAEANT | 29

eqrem—1. B, om, weahyat 2 ALB. CO. om, 4

--- Page 337 ---
246 everfogerret? { statisate

Hema, Maree weqrfaqisd, dq wegeiifa searsfa-
asa: | aaa Heat ay Weavsdt wa weqafarvse, F waRdh ft
seqiafaavsaat: | wa BEATA AeTAT vet: SHAT: [Tha [AISA 1.
maa weqrafaqeagiaa weg. a aearefqavsrTsateIs |
¢ aegeitfa aeamsfasvse: 1 aartarare faggatned, TAT
fang: tferaa eft ara sead— rear = sfeuvsd y Hearsfa-
aoa | F Tsai seatafannsam, saat afyast |) Hay ?
meray langlaaraacalsaiacad | ReTIT AeTAT WAT: ATAT-
AcaTITT:, AATTSAT: CHEAT: TASKS TLAAT: |

Ha $a HeaAT:, FAT THAT Tal’? ATW UE wa WT,
UR Ua AEN, TH Taryn scarfs 1 weaqegeatat oft
Tat wea meta tad famat weal az: ETT TE
gia 1 ea af ? weqnggmeta wean nzer agatactuetad,
tpemgueta «os epemetiofefs 2 | aear— airea  atacat
qeafa — ‘a: afad’ia, & aeat mig— ulate: gare ATT:
fanferar efai aaa: afeqegia aearace aaresarefa[ see ]-
ware: 1 AT ste 1 ar metal afa: ar eperiaarsaearaia: |
meqar afaaacaa epenfacmaat eqlgaigy | wars a | WeTA-
wz:| sfanvsecfearra ofenfera: 1 geen wate amlaTdgey
qeartiaataat a een era ft RETHVSA TNT ATALAGST |

ny aisatad san? weqa— gar gala wal fede ae
qralsqare tlrag st wit Tarafeacay., Tar FeeTa: Aeaey-
HHT saaageT: (age paler var Wieasasx iat IAAT
fanfasa Bet, dar eatatdgea: Wa aH | Ta sarTaTeget
yaragiaary 1 arava vaercfa yareaeiaat sfater-
asad | waar gaa’ area ag eaTAaET YaATeTAg-
faatqeary |

eareat—1, C. ata 2. B.C, om. aa:
3. CC, ay 4. A,B. C.D. erat
5. Mss. area staat:
6. A. gap. for gaa ; B.C. om. URat
7, D. faserarafis

--- Page 338 ---
rite: qo | sfrvsefafien vantataecore a9

water aa age raartictafarzeqreqag to adrergated |
‘warear fafa gat Tat | tar Araleargareqaiafafe carer,
Tea Aree ahaa | sleet da vtetear 1 ateleargat:
stadia, aerate aacferay | ed gr: ater aa
afenrag ? eerg— oar aeltsahed factag? var ad ger afzet
walta, war a ddiaqe aisle gar gaaaa: 1 sad a

aalaulerwey FATEAAT TAT |
waz vailaaat a aarpEteat why: a

eft 1 qenae[sara]' fafa 1 seat— aersaaarg Ta
VARTA TaeTeaT wala Tar TRAE: | AAT Wears TeeaaTAt
FEPGTEAANT THU, | TatSTTaATA adore vaeaat aetshara:
var aaey fata. + agar geaa aeraadt aetslraegdians
varia aaeq faate: | ae vet adifacar faada aaistaaaata:

aa qiled faard ateieaea qe: saad, a pateatsat-
fat ? geat—aenta qaamre AMAA AAITBTT TA TAT: |
aaae wa at GaysTeasdaied, [qeq:|* wh | aarfy qa-
aared qaleceanaatarag | aanfaetancqigtarater aed |
waa seq Hegel ieegeniaarea | aaa |
star ala fart ifwal faad Sat g stearrer saat: i
aeatfea sat oPeat sacar, qart wernt eheala: aread 1 [ua
a vearifrarata: seaenaa a acd wfaraa 1 var fe favs
quraaaiey aqalearseay 1 arfsar: frsufeg qusaraita,
qameatee: gleam] awdlfs, mbes: wefrsaafaarura-
soarereaatafa: weary sfasrat 1 vanaf wereaeetea-
et ea -aerhtha-sar-arsg-qa ate -wyifeeragite alae Terat
egenta where | cemgaeraae qeaafearersty a aaa fee |

a4 fenaiat aa: sfafed aaa | aq a atk afeaz
wat art aft aaa — adfan: where quaasrrcnfa-

saTem—i. A.B, C.D. a2 for ae 2 A.B C.D, ae:
3. A.B. C.D. add @ here. 4, Mss. read aar
tie we 35

--- Page 339 ---
aac wrerfearate [ snrerfretro

jar ek aragr ward weraaneeirga eft | eeTd—
anid fea amart sorofe: wera aq? “aaRdT AurfeaTy
saat TATYTHNT AAA fa | TAT a eefasrnaTrereT —

sa: faget: fea fazaetar
satifa: AVaaAraaet 1

@ gaTgana eaae

geafet & at aat u

aa: a Refer sat

wears aatafanetay sary |

wat weieg faq: ostat
qaTaiaaatsacad ou cae |

saat weaaraigad fara 1 gaa a’ wear A aTTRsa’
qfrarrar: | aeeat— ‘oa: saa’ [seztsart, vg. 0x] fa
aaa ‘ae ow fea’ [aeeremett, 4.4. 4) sarr fra
qa asadiafaad wee sad ged. 1 wa ae a Bfeae-
eqenaaed Tea FI, aeaTedT ca Ma TAT! | A ATT
mee, TAT Tar aeaqaMsaTT AIT.” | TEATT
BOSeAT TEA GATA TET” Tar ae

TYASAATT: THI! | arateategqeiad afsetd aa wtetteara |
peseaadt aieatena seaveafsararha Ga Tage |
aq? WRNEATTTA ey Ua | TERT PAareaTaqalay | sfaate
da video seat sfrsataararia weal aaa ATANAT |
ga: ? wereayacaresr areas | Ten “atTale aq etaleaT-
fafa trav tt

sqreat—1. Mss, vast var wer wreredtter

2. A. B.C, gap for 44% 3, B. Qarqawar
4, BC, fanedt 5, A,B. C, mi
6, B.C om 7 7. A,B, C. MATTST

8 A.B. C.D. read Fate,
9 A.D. wan (?) 3 ©, WaT
10, A, B.C. Dy 74fa 1. Cc, eat

--- Page 340 ---
wetted 90-98] a ferowerfgeret aiteitecyerfertizat vectasfetiad T2348

[ sfaavsefaurrg j
eper: farsa BAA aA, AATEATSATTATTTE—
aeaaTeages ed oeaaedt WITT |
gfaacaea qed qHeatafamTeay ll 2s ti

meMAISAgeAA | FEATHVSAA Foe WeATAVSATEAT | Heat
mucasaig ‘afraumass war’ [Aiftate, 4] seater qe
saeATay | ed ed afeewest orettqarctt gfanvse, aafa oat
TRI | Wieavseed wea 1 TT AeA RS TE TAROT aray 1 TAT
arat Yea FAY, TET THAT Hed TT yHET, TTATZ AT YACATT ,
afrerd fraqiieferatread: 1 cat —araq sarafeaiora
gfeaaatinrateaet neared = gaioeqed «fared, aTgii-
ARTMVSAGIGT: BAATAVSAT THTATTATET OT qaaealiea at
aeqa: qa az aETA TA aeaftevsa aT | CAAT PeATAAA IST
aqreaa 1145 Ml

[ atiteaqafafaar agafanfaners |
pears anus ce faeaeara ae —

Sasa T at STAM VAATTTT |
gaqatal FETA ALIANT WARATT Ul LS Il

sfarvsner wusaer a frat sfraeserafarey sarare
eiertaqaa gaqd dead a sedis, waraieaa ara
aieaiaad, ar eeaiiaaae aaa sfenesergfaaey |
aagt— ‘araify araqafneafreer ‘afetea’ [sfaate, 4° |
sit act owfrat aratfy seadisaad, *aretefarganrsrarr-
frag: | wer ag errand aa aerfaninda faa ate ‘sachs
mamcepry [wirto, qo] gaama: afd: aya get saree
ava car adslaraarasamres ofa: Pefafa vee ar: To,

 

 

areay—1. B. om, 4
2, Co om. aa to TRA Tat, three lines below.
3. BB. ayaa (wr.) 4. C. aaq7

--- Page 341 ---
Ro wrafecrat [ sre fento

fact satire) ater alfir areify areqe, atdaciten-
wT, TT aks caqgetfersmeany reg arTgay ,

sai ag facat: 1 qaar— afe qienaaa| arate |afea:
lagiaaaafgfranfng) erent aera aa geaitaqkea: fiafate
wea Seaatacaard = faecifaed! araifrareg 1 oa
qacats watatafangacq [ ania] 1 aa wasaria fear
TAM ar weaafsrsaqerat hee ua QartezaaT:
Raga alqaaaarasam yeaa ae Sirs ara Sa
gata teata —‘yartimefarey’ [arafrarc, 2y] ef qTaateta:
weated, say aagkal werrart vet wate sfaassty
eqeat wardifa taizagiay i qu

[ Velsageacfiat genta: |

WEARATT TTT A TT TTA ATATS —

a oar: aang afeetanh: TARTANA |
agelaaaa aeantal wa wala 2° |

ails wiaaer cedisafe:, fears aceatted a vitenrfer:
wasq, wtaafeetead: sfratanft: atanfs- 1 catsqqstae
camieierain: ohare 1 at ats wretsaqafen: eaheareae za
[atfacegensa Janae a a gata] gar aa egemerar fen:
rparasrafaa emtatearas:, sfaaela|? qe) aer
alertia: eareaafafeegena | afaataaeta + faattanifaaitaface:
oferera 1 wand fargret faced wafer wfratar after
a. afastantafete |

ulfer uaaqgaroraad sfs aed ) cam— ada
Parrett SATE aT Prenat ranean e faafercar tetera i

aaregi—1. ALB. C.D, faa

2 A.B, C. a4 fatarr: 3. D. Fare

4. C. waltaradtad 5. B. afisraetqy

6. A.B. C.D, aaa: % 0 ABC, D. om, 4

8. Mss. read faagratrasat 9% ABC. D. afastanfa

--- Page 342 ---
wire: 2q J HTS AIASTLTTH RRA

gaa oacaractisn girccaszrarfa: ageattarsqd = derqe-
qmtadiaca uegrearafatacarg wfercqy fatter at tasiteteq-
qfrafacarfa: areata | Na taathetleaire rasa atlearsaryy
aeareaiiareatiehaar wT | oaTiisserenfa: ae: | weet
sararaded canny faaya | AeaTeIT FTTH TeReaTal ee
facatg fate , fagtadters oaed facafamifaaat agiar adia-
RA WealsahearasaTaAlmasa TenraateherTR CaM ia: AeA
faaaq 1 weer areaNa Genearafeafacay wreterqzaara fata,
fartatg at ot fact famifeafarse ar eqeasanafeafact
afaatareat: eaimteaafactrcareat famteaq 1 wt [azar]
ages area hea eg STA ew sat Tere ar ass eT:
wea: farsa | met eararaan aoat fat | aa seared gate
aay epeqeraaisatarcaty fata, frecar weea wpeaiea: | we
famist aq af epeneunafaadt a cafe ast sfaatanicde:
eyeneaaafaciacat ca farta gear tae asthe: | afereret
aq arheat—

a: siternfa: eateata ofeatania: capers |

sfaainafaaaniafecaa: |

agaanfata 0 Wai aapaaaiadata 1 aan treeara
gatas fasten facar. eRenerrafrafcareat frasr:,
aqarat Wtsqaay | Ta a fatafacar wqelamecareats 1 TaSVeT

favaisafaa:— aagaiae afager* a oagetaafatia 1 oa aed
Tea aeanfetfesAT tl Zo Mt

i TaerqawanaKatT |
Wat MpSIHTTTRTATATATZ —

agarania aecraiarg afettania Tarts |
PCUANSAAATITAT TAT AST 22 Ul

sqreat—I. C, om. farang 2. AL B,C. &:
3. A.B. C. Alea. 4, A,B. ©. D. &: for tq

--- Page 343 ---
RR mrerfsearaT’e [ srefiaro

aya Teadaqarrit: | AHA wea, THAEeSaT-
agneqaiait 1 oo oaaarft aftetearad:  aequifeetatagater
afar 1 Aeove—aiten(a ofaetian ft: sfratrarad: | atsi
wary osfaenaadtfa? fagtiaadie® arta aaiiq oftagq: | wa
aaeaeen Tameds [aca sager | eft, aqr raster
assarares wife t macy safe aeehearsoraria® sri
[art, teresa] one seated’ aa: ageatrarfs
qersiarg strait acai 1 eet gatas weasiterteea:
Tovateaty eae | Tet f aT ? ae | Laer R ATT | AIT

nfatedtfa qatat ARartay wa:
[waealantatd ge ]*° agi wiFa 1

Tat
ar ant arferat cag waa Bree 1
Ma carta 7 qERt ea gator afadata
[aqere:, Tarra, ay]
meas areata sacral areas afar zaTTTAeT
waae” wezery— weteasaad fT AeeagT sa,
masse Maleate sed | ET TTT? aepararfaswara |
ae “omega frrasiagha:, +f watererana” [srsersartt,
fragay ¢, wasarmgraera | aft 1 waa aedteaitaisa-
SITAR a STAg Taq: WMATA TT |

 

sareat—1. BL Agee: ; C, aya-gap-ead ara
2,3. B, fa for fa
4. A, Taasdte-gap-ae7 efa Tar waite ; B. wetiq---af ;
C. meta ea; D, qerapsatt-gap-ar asaigss aaffiz
5. A.C. Begrat; B, trxar
6. A.B.C.D. %grar(D. a) anti
7 AB C.D. aaa 8 AL.B.C. D. Sarat
9. A,B. C.D. aaeaanfafrard (A 3)
10. A.B, D. seg frareat ge; C. argeg fret at ae
Il. B, waa 12 ALB. C. D, area aq

--- Page 344 ---
site: 24 |] ofrrewefafaay ugegetacir feat ark

| sfanssafafant agegetecaafear |

waa gaat sat ded aa eae elaarefsears: | EczTz
queried fMeiq 1 Ae Uwe aeaTTaT Tq HeTT-
msariainia wars fad, aera? sfanise egeagl Bale |
TT ACPA AHTSS TMs Asad wafa ‘waft
Warars UT tat; | aur: wareadaq’ [atetPate, ae] sf |
wet qiaAvst aaa HSS gat vata, arareraia | ATeeat Agar
arafasrrr sararatar: sraieaserar meq wafra, fa) varied
mafaty daar: seafzaserat aga wafer caaarit i sa
GACT BSS HET VTA egg TigTHISt THlad ? TaTA— TeHSAeA
gaia sadlattt starpeaea® agar ysraifesqar | aHe
fara—‘sfaassaea wed qaquearataardy [sratzarc, qs]
git slaassayiaat west sawaqdal: weal: sferad, facta
qalaaraNad |

vaesaqeaa aAlaaaat aaged faa aradracara-
giana = oatet aafaaq | dea ater
qaist[afarmatlae = gear [ aaa hearacca |oa[ sar |-
vay | qa owaieafag” | aia frat da seaqrAeTe-
smear aneta 9 aanifsaq 1 ‘aciaavsaiaegert |
[aq sansqtcaat: |’ searremeste oaatassa, facta:
qalaaita: | aa aT aifesgr aT HEqIAVEAeTAT HeITATSA-
era t at Tarsagiqaerauaaad shaq
sqaaqaa: cet: sift scene gia shane, fedtagedtarea’-
earaiiara slarena sifefeeraa' 1 wa sirrvedtiera4r
alfedata 1 aa afe atfe[sara: | sfeassayfaet a geafa, dar
samsagiqaca sifesa deat 1 aradt sfeawwarifedata |
waa fregearar:? ae: TISAI TAATTAe aT | aEeTTTaha-
tlafread, sitavsamita afgeraanrg afteivers git aq ate

 

wuremt—-1, C. #aTT: 2. B.D, went
3. Mss. corrupt: C. Feat areazT
4. A. B.C, add gear
5. A.B. C.D, qeafacerh for gear
6, B. a7 for a7 7. ALB, C.D, eget + oF
& A.C. D, qed 9 A. B. qdtaat:
10, BC, anfefedte afiae 1k A. B.C, D, favre

--- Page 345 ---
Say apterfpatay? [ ssreifirerts
auras wfaatsamia aad sfaavzayfaat asad aar
aq sfaosaacra fafafa 1 wot geaifesarat sfercad aoe ary
qaeIgqasarad| aaa | gt we | Ae ga: sfaaeeaqhzane-
vaafafa araataae: | cdtsfafaceants sqea'aurfaet fea —
afe cararifascaey peamgaa a yasgT weak, aar aa
mot sarvsaay Be | sgeacatrwearg saranf TreIt:, weil
WTgIt:, Tet gaTsryasIT 1 aeHINS AREISy yf eqet
wal wala, yeq eee hed sang? t fitiad? vevat afiret
fauter Yar qatata Tecate, Ae wedIeT ofercagt 1 gdtaaz
waatraq att aad warafsd wate where 1 aqdaa
arateat faqany alt warm aq aise fagtes fe Arete
afaad i ta eqengt wale, ace steed a rae

aq gt: Meated feat aot sifaig seqe | aaat—
qRiraraasain epagattetzar sat apueqrstiear sr
aed sitmosagieat arasiasan, | aareaufafsraedteqartr
wate [we | arraa i [aaltaedenat wat wal aaa faoqeaea,
mere veer [a] aueaued arreqaradisafegshys qeqage
aA, SARM | wt Aega[eacry |* | casa at “TA
qepAT TasagTad wale ga’ [srafsate, ge] genta gear
frtat | way? afegy, wareqeg qeake* qege pepo’
faay vrarepeltaera: | maga wate Ter [arafEate, 22]
ake sear wa ar aadieaa aecaifeeaer wealrererareat
ahead | fe aca ast ae sary ar Gated Aedtsaadfiq
wala? R24 DH Heelsaalereaat: aTaat ofeaq ga: ?
farargaraat[ drat ]a° i aaal— wanda Ba deed wen Tg
aime were faetiente | aa Bexaafaariia qaratiest TEteaT
weeigrertiaaqi faa eared aye asia arrays fa-

 

saleat—1.  D. qed (2. BC, afteea
3. B. om. dala to Ae Adee ofiaza, three lines below,
4, C. om, areiey 5. A. B. C. gap for eeamq
6. A. B.C. D. aay 7, B.C. aut
8. A. B,C. D, area 9, B,C. wat

--- Page 346 ---
ete: 240 | sfanvsatafaar ageqete corti BRN

qsayiaaty Gana aeeargd ataraag | -warfassrararaiaere-
aa a TTdT | TAT AAI aa AYPTAT Hol APTASTEE HIS
Mimtleaser TaNIe Mensa ad, fadia ge* gear fasier fe
ahateareattad’ i galt 98! wardgad, waa a2! graneat fagqaae,
‘marge sfratamia aarts sft saad 1 os MalesaRT Te aEaT
val wafer | Tea weaieafaged a Gaeta aaivahkrg’ yaaera-
aq gta al pale | aeaeatateliag|ataase faara Teneaeay
fawier ydadta qeaisg aad i aca qratealager feqeHaear-
farszeqriqaer = at faa: a° anata fgaenadianearara
famtaza, afaracay sfatq 1 [wala fedemaarafag aA
ata fadiatg aera stata] | TRand areata faster wreit=q-
gfageanr aa: Syl ga’ alacactia® | cata we Garten:
waist TH

afaansaanifa aetna faafeqer |

nedlea qaaa _aleginiearaigmerd 1

ada Fad Med [aaeteater gear) 1
amadga at aaagEe > w Raat: 1
eqeqayat fasat wacarsatteat canted: 1
eaaAT TAG YAAT aT? Hor: wUVAE TATETA

avvatagameafarraniantad: |
neefagstak gta vigat easy az: 1

 

ameat—1. A. B.C. aftstestegreg 2. A.B, fadtaat

3, A.B, C, 9@ fectagameta Fae quattsreaeardtaa
4, A.D. adtaqa 5. A.D. waaa8
6. C. Wags 7. C. om. al

8. B. arabeq for ara

9, Mss. corrupt: A. B.D. faaratiag; C, faatad

10. B. ag: egzT 11, A.D. om. gfe
12. All mss, read this pada as Taal: Gaara (wr)
13, All mss. read Taree (wr.) 14. D. Afor at

rio He 2%

--- Page 347 ---
RVs tererferrtent [ srTerfarato
a sitstteata gt: atea: frgareacraay |
aig apied gaara Wenetita

vagaed qaisia aeafatg) aerate 1
wafer aca fatal asfrareat tt

fefagwatagen fafager® gaara 1
svqeHETA GET Mistheg: eet GW

[agrarentiay , vx¥-¥q |

ma waqegaran waisaaqagsiacaray | at TTA
aredé at fart

SHUASATACATATA | HETUHVST GI HOTU AISAATA |
fe qq? waaned, taqanveaHEIy | RETIAISATM TAT
aqaNes A RAMTAVSRATMeATMAAA | Alea, HeaTHVTATATT-
TaTAAET | ae wea: 1 Ase Heal WE: A HeTTTVSM ATTA aA
aafa | waged nala— peaisfamsarmiaa arideta aisat
AeAAAS:, T Ta eHT lt |

[ ggeqatawat wedat Ranaatar |

TT TACHA sqres Haler | AT wsgeilagaanfa 1
aifa ? aaa, ofeaa gare: i wear aeatearerata aria Aeateq-
quia aedisqrarwea aaa weet, TEMA aTHTAgTE eT
aaa 1 wiena afaetane 1) ater tetearerey atte afetea-
aaifs aft siaaa aealea, TEM SR ASA H EMTS
wad wseerq— aed al HegeaHrargTgersad, “eA aT ahalea-
Bernacaradiad sf? weaa— agra aad aeatey [arate ]-
awa wasted, warq wad aitetiee MARATHI: ATA |
aaa Farraiaied’ 4 cafe agraraig wea qfaca arene Sia
qa wT ana faetear:, uma ufsea:, AMT Artes,

 

waeat-—l. B.C, fag 2. B.C. Hapl. om. of fefager
3. D. Hapl. om. of one 22
4. C. agra for Fa al; B. om, #4 to Crea, next line. -
5. Mss, WateX TAHA: 6& B.C. D, attareary

--- Page 348 ---
see: 24 ] aeegetredy serraretty RW

facar facer sg a: 1 ae agNNea: Wee cr
area weenie adtsay writ at ofa Weld fagtead ?
aeata Tiragrear seat Mera aracrgatamagy | wre
gern ‘ofatamls gor pay | fe Gaza wea ?
BATT | ate ve: eireara cafe aay ve: eretearg faMeay |
gata meted gar sala gar aeta stated farmers ete
aaaaad , feeg sarefefascra aafratit 1 cer qarareind
famtiza wate aenserqr sat vere oftfn:, aatta walearg
fayd a2 arrar sat oerar ca ciefa: | ag Fae Werafags
we aa waears aeagayd, ag fader da qatar, “ag glare
aq fgdtrsé, aragddd aq sancefafa 1 wa ate ascaradt
etal, Tena getfgmery 1 Tava Me eaTy | Areas
qui sale Teale

RAMNSATA: | HEATAT HVS PReTTAISAY | WIA TAAT
Sq al qed WT dq PEAIAVISAN | AA EATHVSAT AT: Heal
HUST: |e? Wl HED | ae CET ad TaIT7 | Aes
aaTaa aad saqd a feed) aee eqneaaciey [eaniter]-
que TF Hee VaqAMCTy | Ta TART HET, TA BeATAVSAT-
Hag: | VaTTET HeaTAVSs Tat Hed Tafs Ta? aedlaTg | TAT |
zqat ag HeaTATsea sar Hafassd TAaafasoHTAT ASEeAT |
aay? qa aeaTaVedea ToNaeTET AISSSAT | waTAATIT
guyqaaay asasay afeectdtat) TWAT — Sraeicel WAIT
atfasareat durfnagq — afe vftenqaasferrtad qasaratizst,
[var] seactarteat & ef 1 arat— saranda e% qasarsiiess,
aaisanages serlaa reqs F sft asd Tea TST
assaraifest | aa sanagaa: qarreataratgrie aifearad
ferafafa sorand afer’) fadiagerrat: eat: saree satiate
amaraiartiad 1 va atfenr faecar aafa, qoratfentanreaget
ao. | Ua Healey: HTeata: M34 Ml

eqreaT—1. B. arqaw, C. 8 Aa:
2. B. om. aa qataad

3. Mss. add sfancmy

--- Page 349 ---
RRS werefeoree [ "refine

[ aeieerafafeat afigepregetiacng |
TEV eT ETAT ATS —
TWTAIATA: KPAAENT eaIa seg |
maqeaay vegies vat waft a 1 22 1)

SMAATTAT | AAI TTI TAT TAT ATTA: | OT
HITTITE: TITTTEAT Tey TATA: 1 TTA sey ae arq:,
Feit 92 ae, aha 92 sada, aqy oe arm ef | aa garfee:

THANTF BEAT THVT TT TATE — WRT TITS TET |
ga: 2 seqd— ‘nedieare’ eat qeait aatarfearfety 1 sat
weisateerta wateererat ge: sferat, 7 ea WeateaTT
weal wet qa: ? seqe— ara fafeaety way 1 arafaset-
warefaat ae: avaaset aeaeatoratil wat aa: 1 Fa aethe
arated weated verereay, aa Snhor trearfear wretsaTa Tatset
wet wate | TEA TqaNe aT RASAT gem: Ga aurea |
afe oftenqamtieta saT, aseeyaches: Fa oat wet |
wate aufaey | sratradarafersaraieaeeitta: , eaafchy-
WENA TeaTATTSEAT 1 Sa oF efirat afrersarar aefferattars: |
eraearase MATT: | ase GaRMAT 1 fedtaq’? get
vay saafegar sfa, seRasaTHe SAT | qaegatiare ayo sy
crater aft easarad wary 1 aae Te seater sar saafeaart zfh
SOROS AT | TF TATE Cy Hehe, age Ga TaNEt
aa 1 war faders tee agar sarrasqrardsarraarEd ar,
fataqtiarasatned aay 1 sqaediaqareat TATaATATS saree

maa eeraearsad = ag — TEATS age AT
vata 8a: | fede aged gaignd waeatfeandid sang
dirrafraag aarererg aaeaa ag fedtaraer Tang ag feeiter
Be Ta ety waafqesd, az TscTey HA HeTTTE aa 1 Wa fFetz-
Tare eager a fafeszafaest | gen arredey-
Seay: Gat: — Tats qasarna aq:, fadtatescmasarnat
aa: | udtat neha Harfes ea: | ataereras ad aardfitd

wareat—l.  C. wees 2, C. fad oz
3, D. Aenfeiz

--- Page 350 ---
veite: 22] ufaqegregetaray RUS

fadtarasarrary 1 atfedifng § [soratsamrd] fedtas® nad
giaagqaies 1 gdlagt aasaredt gay agate adtavecfa-
wate garg adie aqavacsarfana erating fares, a
aatarafaead twa aqcard araanitqeacara fataaatercag |
qeareahs a care. garters pare vata 4

ye aetazatead | ate cag aty gear: oftaz: aad
ead | Ty get: here: asset ageag a offi sfaqveaeq
arcaaeat frsert 1 Fa. ? saRIe gaeq agen: sfefa: | da
fadtaqasraras few: ofehe carta ofegasd gee Taq
aa nef, a akorgda + ay ate: | gear: afera: 1 Aq
aaa Fa gear: after: geera ef | saafea 1 wat fraraa—
wa ofaa sosat[Taaraer, wast Geatrrarrsarar RATT
PNMTTICTT:, Tae wT waa 1 at Gear gered t
qzat— sant sqsat ofeeqeator gear sata aaenqa®
fasacarfzat sfacd, wfet saat | saufedlaqarsay
FAATTATS STATA

varie vitstiear | MSA TANT AMC HATAT Ee
faqdan i vanaqaay: ened, fadtagetaar, aa ef fava:
aaa waa WaT Aset aa,* gereraay 1 afta.
MAMAN Yass | aa MitHd oTaaT Gye aga
Maas GA TAT aT | Tae HH ArieHay-- ale earaesasset
ge owed werd, aamietsaniawsy feofafe eqeadutata
aq TTS, Tt se 1 wa fefets sacral ?
geqa— “ged fe woeersegy nels nearest tal sat: [aralsato,
qv] saat | aa aaa sears feat ? aeqa— Peaarnslt
wade aca wadifa a Read) ga? artieantsfalaeaa 1° da
arfaafaat wert saree aT ETT ATT at Taare Bat
waala | aa Pefafe state arfatreaa’? aararafasre ea: |

aareat—1. B.C, afmaeag 2 D. Ta
3. ALB. C. D. wat 4. A. B.D. gap for 94
5. A, D. afaisaa 6. Com. ua

7. A, C. arfatead

--- Page 351 ---
RRo wrefrarai’d [ wreafrate

WIlaAT WeAH— PEATAWACY AAT TqAATHI saTared:,
ara cafecarfiataarat acafiaaacat: [axes], sfravsacary-
aaa aqrerafaatad | aeqravcatcrasarnatacnfacacrfraraa:,
BEUITATHVSAT: § FCASATATTCATA | AF AeTa— TerateT ays
alfefroraaot eared sfarvsaer 1 da aufaatogia: 1 ud
aig + wearaosager sfarvsafafs 1 waleaa— aasoarel
sears fanvset Jet | Tt Hearsifarvsaaeges saradty 1 aa: THs
‘sfanssasrad [sroTdad] ? od waotaaATAT seageaTs
taeaqaigssruagead waft 1 ata sancarat sycqeaaor-
waa saad = eararsaa waft 1 va aAoTesaart
fedtavard’ fssagufassrarafad waft 1 alt [vere]
SHITTAAATAATT: «PeIMAVsTsaTaSIAT | Agee.
TicHMSTaATTAT AT aaa: TaTVsseqseM: | TTYNEATAT
Taaneatiaahkaraaaa saree atfeneratediaa® aad
at 1 waafe sfarsaneara eararetea afeeral eararq) Tar
gata qosd oftactaet ena 1 TaTMAEATE HueAaTTAATTAT,
aa gears ametaufaarraiahes 1 wag afracaafasas

afaqegag i ufiea gesa qua afaqens: | waAEAT
airqepry aaa qealsara cafe al enagriad] aad set at
at waft 1 ga qdadf, wearq sadtfa’ 1 ater’ a sane
aq sea fare scat sterndin | aera fediaaaian aceite:
anarnafeaaiardiad 1 aeamlerneiit sat at at aT
qfeneagt 1 aa: asa Tal wale | aq Gea Fa BT FT AT
aafafa— afrqeasg 1 oa ofaqegon: wemar wa ofeaed
HI? Heamer egdlacoiaacara ) Tar aa eaetaatea 1

qdaq aa afaqeacy aeaay? fast, arlerHada
weay TIT FA aT wad Hdea wean daa: [wa]
MaeaHaragdeatasr aera sar Tega: | AatafeT 1 Aeates-

 

sajeat— J. A.C. D. add Heat here. 2. B. om. this sentence.
3, A.B.C.D. eat 4, A.B.C. v
5. A. om, 3244 to wafa, same line.
6. A.B.C, waqrdtat 7. A. B.D. safe
8, A.C. D. afr 9, D. Aeag

10. Mss. Afra

--- Page 352 ---
gate: 22 ] nfaqug neglect R34

wrasse va Afacafa 1 ga: 2? ‘wHanfeHanaaag
wady'fa [seereatal, v.9.53 qasaaagraaq| waaufrHaisht
wey Us | Bal eaaT: tqaaeHdiste caqreqd a aetic, 7a
auaaasaeata, waqafa, g sat da ada aeah fae 1
AAA TAAHSTATH A SaTTTa Hales FETA ATaIT WETA FAT |
aga: MAlqalst THaHAT Hast dq eHadeHaaTAa ie
Brat waqaena wa feaa | aeara feadafagr aeeaned
aTeaHaas TeTA Ve Peat 1 a eKeasrHt wale |

wad seeeuq— aeaq ferafaanedtearaa az fendafeg
uq seared Feaa ( Seaa— ‘Aeaearg eGeNea:” [aTeafsato, 23 |
afa mesh faad aga fendfaaistt qeaa va Ha: ? ‘wHea-
fananacaag vad it aatig | ud atefag, ga: eHeneaATET
gaara wats afaganer aft. wera fg eqereaaagrate-
fread | aenrg fadiana aedtearard Ta avata Heae ag Pea

aitsiteares eget tar gfe | a UaaHa THe AEAA: MATSTHATT
eqel wadifa eHeAETT AaieaHATT: wae Pasa, eHEt walT |

aenaagraraas = coreanigett | heh MATATATAT
aaqaavsaaiaer agfaqzat Haid) acwearacse UfarsaTtar-
farfaan | denise heararacasdterraicanafacaeaacaadt A
afeavia Hee Hear oarardgedaa wHeha aaa TAT AVSAAT AAT |
asfarsay 1 [seatlreaanafg: sfaacsa frsara aaa
agra HeqrAVsatalamtaaraad Be Ha TIA AWsa-
aifeala | & atatealag 1 aarzar weararssea Ulasatia Het: TAT
HUTT | TATAGdat: Tear: wearaverteaheeracarg TharasseATes
sqrard sifsatad afar pe: Ha:, Tae saeT aa [sfarosa-
qfefal’ aa egafa aa cart eget Fe: | HeaTAVSATAT A
aeMIA Gea gerd | saAATsAl: Teareageey Ge HEAT ART:
aqaiga | fadtagdtaat: cael: searruseiaaterafeqacang
gfarvsaea, carataid alfeataragita Fa: F:, TATA Fa

 

aqreat—-1. B.C. D. feat 2. B.D. om. @
3. B.C. waege
4. A.B. D. aaa; C, qWaxat 5. A. B.C, D, gaat
6. A.B. C. read searqosagfes:

--- Page 353 ---
R82 wererfiertett { srafeat.

weqmusaneriq sfaavsathta aa egaufa aa eqel we: 1 a
a ReAITISAsATIAMT Tatsafassd | aa Tg Heat fedita-
qaiaat: veal: werqagiersag |

MAN GaAgt esaasaea: qelemdada wateag gas
qs: asifaa seneatqafa: 1 dat qaadeate stetenfeeqg qT:
cofrarairaafartar | sr? sfarose eqera udt, wer
Meeataes Hess | Ga: HeasaT IT yaAAGeAA:
geal: gsod: feqacateneqaen Feqsarqgeq? granary Hez-
seed we aa aafe qeferacata Fexsatager, fedtagdtaat:
gaat: geod: feqacaia Fexsarmger aewaraqdtad 1 wa va
aeaadtaat: « ceenefaescareqat:, araeioy  geardeqerayeat
qarefaacraiseat faa: 1 a area qaTeaefaacqATeT
qa weaaosaqeqia osfamosacitta cafaarta sari aa
egufa, aa eHet we: 1

ae TITIgT Tafa—atragayg asian aa? wats gafirfa |
Wee AAs ad Har wT aa, afe ae ae aT aa! aat
aHaea saqaaaicadiad 1 aa feadend wee ae
aq aa wala, ot ag ae Mafa® eeqeaa ai sea ha aeATAEaIET-
wa A BAIT 1 aa: AedleqaTare: | GaAsAMgT | Aa:
Marana fad 1 aHageearTsg aged w Ha ada | TaaT—
are Mera aaetaye wt aT aegley Hear aearerard
a at wagers ardisaay aepa: "a eee) gal wala ae
mapa epe sit waTATATT 11 22 1

[ satiate afrteqgaregziacag |
TAT THELHUTTHTAPAT ATS —
Raa Ta weg wees |
WEAN WHEAT! MAE AAT THAT FAT Ht 23 Ul

 

qgaq—l. A. B.C. D. neq

eareat—1. A.B.C. D, 9@ for aaea 2, B.C. erat
3. CC. eT 4. C. sera
5. A.D. om. a 6. D. 3a for waft
7 C.om.@ 8 Com, a

--- Page 354 ---
gaits: 23. | ufryeqreqatTett RRQ

ast A HAA Ter BTsy ae aT WY AT
aad [weay ar ndeaq | ud afe ware: wader water fear
wey aay A aah aT eat | a wae! Bo weatoTfT
ant araiseteaa 1 [aaq? |] ca—

ae Ts Aa attot eit gaat watsaq |

gua wart faar ariearamaata | wanaait 1 ‘eq’aedoafy
ama, TT ay eat By a aeag Peat ‘ea’Msdishh a
Hae: | TART WET Al ASA: caeq® q geared Tag MAfas: 1
agt ‘arate aad fate qeefaaer'fafa 1 a a Talad— ‘eaeat arate
eatery ar frat fa | waraTata |

AY AAAS TMAT HATS AT ATTTHAT AEA AG TATT
at feat. at ga: wet fad, wecea aTeAaaeaT fara ?
JVAA AeA TAT TACT WTYTH | TA AZ USCA AMT TeAraIey
sfircaa, ATYAATT | az ws aay THleqardlad, AreleqTeT
meMTTeT | oat a afaeara—

ana: wa laaat: aaa: Maas fae: |

eft 1 aenraad at eee HaTdediTaaTaal waa: |
Wiseaa gen acdada ada ae aay at feag
TeY Ga: TatTATATaTHT RTT |

waleaa Aaleatidieanadd dead arated cha |
ga: 2? wdgaaal weeftderq) aa aghast Arey AeaATE
famifadta aq BAAS TT THe HEAG ET aA aT PHAM | eRTAEAT t
[weqnea] egeearadfacara [eget 3 a, afageg |* aeaAg
HAT HTHEAAT: | AAT THTCT ASTAT: eRSMETAT: 1 WHAT
eat fascar aa fata watercaterd 1 wisieares ep
dani maleated Ge AT eH: eHeT: | wae: HaAAT:
ayeaanfaad | tn ganeteat steer sft aTAT WR 3

 

eqregt—1. A.B. C. 14 AGE: 2. A.B. C. om. 44
3. B.C, aq
4, Mss, read eget aarfe say

MIG Alo Zo

--- Page 355 ---
Be rafearna f starfire.
[ wry: egetecay |
aya: FAZ—
aise eteTaa vat TIAAEy |
HAA FT APTA Mgreaeaq wel waa ze I

wisteatafs sr Heahord Ga Tat) ata asia
maa | ca aadien wafers: | seo waery | af we MoT TAT
ad sadeaq 1 aaeq a adeafhateaelaa 1 atcig— aaa
waale Hedied eaaralea, aera caqeaSy | eGeRent qyget wae: 1
Say ? faavaaat ata aleiteanaraa apd aay aT
faafacafaetiae | ead fagrraiy eaeqedt wag 1 waged
wafa— atala faaad arera ] Tag fagiten Rapaea st aT
aay Tay: qyqaatien epeneay waa: | ‘_'-asarq “eleeareT
eget star.’ [arafeato, 23] saad Prat ev

[ qareragreauaq |
[ qareraar | eTTTTATTTATATE
qargetrat eararaea:’ wnat:
Braet TEIN A wats a aay | ay |

TUAIT TAIT ASAT TEATATAI TT TeaT | qaremghaat
WATAAREA FT ATL AT YoUTsaat waif aeafs 1 saved
gai’ exeoieat: | “oqaret fasar | fasaar gas} emeneiga: | erat:
aaa: TaHT TTT: | waged wafa— “netisaacte  aiteiteaaeter
aT aa: a: aaa: ATER: | weatat agit. 1 aTagfeoarat

qa— 1. A.B.C.D. ad 2, A. B.C, D. atatsat
cateat—1, B. hapl. om, egemeqt = 2... aaa
3. C. g@

4. B. om. earard to tancaait:, third Line.
5. © ga
6. D. gap for a7at=a to G:, next line.

--- Page 356 ---
we: By ] Aearrgeraereary RAR

[eearat] ager ay aeaciteteaneafrat ar: a aca qartae-
faarerg wadtfa 1 aa wa yaraafaat faetaray arrerc: |

Ha HiE:-— FT Yareagiaat wiTere: | Heats ? sqrarey
meaedea aufeaa— afe fascat cauafafsafrett aaa,
waasHeeagertataateauainsaa yssaat fafa 1 Faq
waraaad | adteata sufaa wa, aar aaaarsenfeat:
waar aera fafa qeafadofaae: ey:, aaaarsat are
MEAT | Tae AAT Tetra’ gereral aa] Aaiqaeaaeary-
weaatara (a: 1 ate arrears aa aimee: career ad wa GeqTaT:
| qaremefaaeq | aruvafaacaeta = faettisedt aeiza
aaa UsaTy asad 1 [set ar] wafeett afaviacfaraatiaaa-
faetareacteat at saqaed | teare yarersafratte wrverz:
arate ay aufesaay | sag? afe earardgerar areata
vaal aared faretaisedt agies aeaa, Tarsalat aT |sTaT Trae
Veraar aw afr faatat aeat 1 [aa ]* gaefa ereadterfiraq—
qed farett: wearrvset eqrarfaensy west, aar qeaTdnfanvear
qaragiaaasseara feafifs 1 géaerfes earared ares
aid, aa fedtaaefad eqeacare grate: 1 wat qorarcary-
arearieeat:, Tareacasaar faetdt gaara, yarrsefaat
wrge, wafaseqger fae: | vafaseugaitadoratuateaat
fafrsad,! aeqrataanesaral saat aacaafateged aatcat
wate, vate aneafrafetcra oeecuateat [adateatac-
feacay|° | Prafeast faeict gisad | gereatscanavsaie eferiar-
qT ITM, Tearasat [faetraa|oare wafer 1 fretafercteae-
aGaiTISSqATAMT aTHTA’ | Bar gaeeafercar F e:, AeaT ate: |
Tal TAA eR aTARem eared aT [wafa] 1 ta aevraface-
aedratdaaiaete’ [fase ata ar]® feaerdarfsarraary |

 

saTem—1. Mss. read wat aaarat 2, A.C. dé; B.D. aaa
3. B.D. : and C @: for wa:
4. D. faareat
5. A.D, Rafeaaq; Bvt Ufeaed | Co + Ufaeare
6. B.D. ateaq foraeaq 97, A. B.C. aeqatiafads
8 A.B. att; Catt; D. aig

--- Page 357 ---
RRR wre frarert [ sraftare
[ areragmt eqeatsanataaay |

ay aware afrararafararifre! at feat
‘afr S-a-o-a-atear:’ [aftsro, o] gaa afratsaaat stfeta-
fae: gardat arraret wardtft sarearay 1 aa aferatsrracr:
qeafaifrr: gaa torent wat, wife, wacntadae,
fameat wt, afameaisgreeea | aad afe yeni HearfHeat
faeena 1 ay cigs) aad eeaTeaT Ca Tat, wa TaSifayrare:
afteqhad frre eft 1 aa attract: yareaefereafirdt earare-
ga: eget wat cafe derfry— afe eararetfercarfatarater
aaa wert yaraefaacfercata: feardtia, waxar aufas-
eral sereeKeM TT aT 1 BAH? YATRITE
frareraat aqrare wITETe TAN, FET YaTalaaeequeayatat-
HUAEA SATATAAT WTSI | Bay BTTETeal: Fat: Aeel=a-
Bef SqpHCTH ETAT TAHA ATTTT: | GA EHTATTAT HT: |
was: aS — «=A [stata = AeratartHTt
arearagafaam: cgeaisrrant wate | wataes Aeeer AealeqeT
saa AT aT arta Area wats faferar encisa Zhe

[ wgeqetacot faire: |

ay fearaqaarniareaazaand aaraaarent eHeThTa-
fafafaaraisfaarere 1 aaat— afaaiarsera coarfeqeal ‘gforar:
qarsaaa fasarcanar wag qarnaateamra Paad | afearia—
ga aniquiasd soqamtad ? tg dig: | sofesetaaq— ‘qargra-
sataara aerary [Afaato, x] ef 1 walerata: wast
sfrresarfaegremaat fe egenfraranamatarcafracaearedt eft
rpecarmeniea: ofered | enenfasa aerate eaarnanfatearcanfa-
eqfaarafaan aera waraatacafa: sorgeatfa: auf Prat —
qadiurast, waersuaqe: fracaarfaeqeymal Tra, WaTHA-
facatfa: srgeatha: fafa i arat aoarnefercarat sorgeaca fafa
yaiead— wyaaraa salfarameegearfetela carearay 1 aa
TAMANT Ten: adr canary Gat ar watt 1 zarfers-

 

aaremt—1.  C. art ad 2. C.om. are
3, A.B. C.D. gap for J 4. C. sadtaarsadaat

--- Page 358 ---
wits: 24 ] agegeteea fates: Re

caer saiifteas warnafrcarged treat staat, [HWE AHA
facarget <faacatsrdtat | sft 1 aaar ofenetsar sattara-
arafaaeaar warnafear wate, satfasrafercar: set
gear efa waeatat silagerysrnafacarrrara:, aeiorrant | a:
fana: gat]? war easager: aealaa wadifa) aeaar carta
aaracna feat va i wat fe eqenft(aramdta seq | free.
TeaTeT ait |

vanani feaeaaratat wermt eReTAT: GalaaraataHaat
valamea sraarmajacaae neat feat | tarracaeetaroit
araaairaeat | aetrareanaferaesrateragai( a auufrag |—
afe qseat qelfutared aera afeaetead aat ISaeatadfestta-
feamat wsaacarfiafges fefata [wafa lar aiefatral weet
famieaa, aacaa ceareqearcatfaat wafer 1 tet a eRer heat
qaifafséa 1 [fetrerrttaaeat jared trad 1 ferfrstacsa-
reenter tegearearaaata | wararfecateasaay TaN: |

yar ga: ae[ea aera cafe jaca aat aeale[a-
at lalararaaaraies agaaararaaa: Pad |

[ fafasfaarsacfiaraa |

vad aatafacenforars es [at fale |sfaresarferraraeae
amat— cpeafea: eget xfaxaitaa, serra fafa: afearaatatg
aafa aa ‘cfaafaatar aafea [afaaran:’ [atafrato, ¥]
gfa egefadt|fatsadtaat 1 sararaama oa: a ara
wea Us wearfesdisctaed 1 waar aletfsat a xfs |
amred’ afirarsteat faateaa, usafavat wearer aft |
aarateser: ufsararzat wafia 1 [atarat sasarara =| fa
ATARAST AT

aa asafacar usareat adararafaaraeararagat: afar
wa: aufalsa— afe qasena acta qaiveaxaatianae afaearat

 

sareat—1. Mss. defective: A. B.D. ama at; C. aeatat
2. C. om, wat 3. A.B. C.D. ofenear
4, C. qwrt

--- Page 359 ---
Ris wrerfiearn’ [ srafieqto

aad gar aifarararteerfaarefercarfr: fraseferara [rt xf ergot |-
ae a sazeditta ferar: feava 1 ‘fawgferat waq a ata:
[arafeato, q] afar fament quart: 1 aa qEreaTeren erat
[fawa: farguritae |] aausarer araqariia accaaia fane-
feratit 1 acaacar famcgaca efaaeafaacfaen fausaet [Ge
wafers: + dares qaasfrreraar:, se aefecar saat
faasicr:, cafagar amerefacat asa ef 1 wacarter.
facarfa: aufeey— afe ate: ‘qaisezadl: epenacaercfacat-
fata: ofafernt avat aq oifataaticafacnts: feara afafea-
aq aaa gia, ta feadg tart a saeoeifa area: fear
‘afteatent feaa.’ [atafato, 9] fa sezar asyoey eRe AT:
rarfercarfasinasar: qatsareataiga: gqalearad: TAT TeTeaT
at waa

[ qata-gaal: aafecdtacaa |

sseararaatal vat anfacafaaray ) aaaeaerat tat
fare vanccafrenfaeduinea | aaat— afe qataequal-
rafeargeqacratiacaita: qalvarat. epeakedared awead aa?
aifatancenfafafacafa: face: cgeafefacn xfa  asart
fercar® xal aeaenqaitn’ sfercaea, afaft ai aa aatdin aaa
aaa suufeararatacar faatera | va aeaeTataat: weaaa-
atfaat aafercat waa eft afmanascqenfa: “qaafaetaaat’
[afirto, 39] sereaTaraiat aetvaistafectifa Eat xe T
faeater sefrry |

[ aaaacfacesacicaag |

TTT Taam smart sft sag weRTHATanfartae-
[what] feat 1 aagr— afafacnfacdufraq— afe aveq-

 

aTemt—1. B.om. qaf to afszaigat, three lines below.
2. D. gap for arm to faa ig, next line,
3. D. a9 4. B.C. om. aeat
5. A.D. om. facar

6 B. aamasaqdft 5 C. qeqaTadfit ; DD, aati

--- Page 360 ---
weit: 24 | waTMasfrretaa teat BAe

focnta: Gargraqeata: acafamfaterarin avert aa [srfa-
weeaafrarfa: fefaft 1 aa TUHTTATTST Tae Jaa Ta
watart: cafarfraras gareraeaty aracartaret [earht,
wet: afefrcarjaraserfa: oma: oat aatarorefea’earaar
[arf waft ast dear] awead | Ne waves sear adaaer
AMAT TIT TAT AeA: area) BAH? afe eaeyacar gfee-
aise avaa, arfataneeafacafe. fearcr ala TeaTTSTAT SAY
are | afrqatsianreafatreraare, welaer ae wart
afseatisa: ofa qsear durfaai fag ay i

gfa wienieg Hal aiqauzaraay

Balas. waa?

mwaeaI—1.  C. wT 2, A.B. C.D. aata(C. F)eatfeae

3. C.ends this chapter with : af@ wrenzer HaTaaacataiy
arafearag aarad | sflaaqesonrefaeareai va: 1

D. adds the following post-colophonic statement ;

maiaterafafaumar qerddaafad war ag 1
aaa: shan sar yaa fe & fafa u

qaia am: 1 framed |
A. B. do not add anything after the colophon.,

--- Page 361 ---
 

MATE:

[ ayearacag |
AM, PAF AMATTHEANT Wet t
guides = aaa

[ ataaa: |

miafeaaeat me, ‘atin vata aia srafaat Tefa’eqae-
care 1 aeae aratsentfafat wera | fe GAREATg Tryt ? TEAAT-
afearaemaratr ada 1 wa TeaTaf staat wacaqas at sfa-
qaa 1 azar faust eqeraaranfag factaadifs sfarare,
qamteatae: ysacet aaratia [fara], darecat: sefarea-
atamnataarafefa: ataret sfarard, wanatla atacae:
qanaiargaraaraatiafa: aaafrafaadt: areata att sfa-
qed | acne feenravasitaaaarerat, ATATATATITTT TCT |
at fe faaafaasirsrats fraaft 1 aearedtafrasqaatsat-
qaanadaaaaeaet wafaadais frematq 1 aa: qafeare-
quaad fafaat qafzaqaaaat: Tas fanaa | aa TAHT
akasacar: wasaassaamseee sft 1 TddaaAAAA
quasars FEIT | quaapeaad frcate qd qatrt
fasta fadtd afacttacqrtass® sftaecafeaa eafeawarart 4
qusagansaed focal aa aaisd TaRAe Ta TeTT | at ‘fafead-
waaa eaheanagqeed casa fread fraser araaiastagaa ag |

 

A. begins this chapter with : “tanga am: 1 afaeraeg
qratataueta aa: 1B. and D. begin directly with : aaa:
C. begins with af: o* Maqaq «gfe aMarmqat aa: |
afacaaeg | arataiaaela TH: | E. does not contain this chapter.
It breaks off in the course of commentary on verse 12 of the
Kalakriyapada, see supra, p. 211,

earen—i. C. enifafcia 2. B. om. afeatt

3. B.D. fadtaeaea-:+ vet; C. facta -gap- aaa
4. A. gap for fafg; B.C. om. fafg ; D. om. fafgar

Q¥o

--- Page 362 ---
aaa: R¥q

qTarnasanae: waa feaaqeeanfracafeararey
qtaeaat taanaged saeq fread faceara 1 qataequed
weqgitga aad, palereagay Gqee ISasM eI: ey 1 a
aateaaizar: 1 ct ohard wsagayfe, vte ofeeqaaarfgg
[aretq ] 1 arf faqag(areateefitfas|avsarft 1 aeter-
Ratt asd ofseqtagfgd qaeafers aoeafeas wz fara
faarmege gear at faarit avsaseaeq eafeaa aeda 1 ar ar
WsaTaTATAHHAT Meat TITaVee: Hoga: | Gatreaferttaz-
ausaaaiseacaeaa: aeATZAMT «sata «= aataafaart
qaareaed wafer area 1 safe aaatafealeaaretartia
[afanrararat agiariaat art cafeaa ara aaa frsaetacy
araataa: | wa fraarfarat sqafega: | a garqtaveafaaead |
MASAI AATAHIse ASA Ta BRAT: ATMA add afeaa Tea
aa Sato gat aalaay art aa ara aTATeATA BTHA-
asaea areat wafer aar feat Taal wateat qeqtarg |
ua adi afata aafaae art aaqsaqar arrieaearqaqausaeg
4 qaiseat water agar frzeata | wa aq fanosaq, ata?
fastanosafacgead |

wameaarate easy: eaeg: TTT EAST avsaifa | gaya:
wissaraTy | eagUaTearae aadin—fagar sato
ATA H STAAL TaTead Asa ATE UTANIss, TUFATg-
maqeratsarat.  queg, = faqararargerasarat trae,
qa aHeptagaearay, wl [fagaat] eer garateaa-
ATT TAS UAMITA, TAA AHA THCHEMMATATA | TaTSTCTa-
qusag sfarrtacaats garin aettarge’ | aorrateararsat: | Aa

 

saTeat— 1. A, aaiarat:
2. A. D. om, 7 3. C, om. aa
4. B. om. aedtara [agi to wafa] qaneaet, fourth line, p 242.
5. A. aaearattra ; C. Ageqatuaaee faqaar ag qadiand
areal Aeaer AeA wReTaqa ga dal Teta eargtaa-
faqarnostaria aedtara ; D. as in B. except Mqeqrgtat
for FweqTUArwa, gap _for wanna, Wsacqda for qsaeT
aaa, and gap for Yreara
Mio We 84

--- Page 363 ---
Q¥R street [ mieio

eaAluaavsaatenvsteT aa area | aed | aeaT
Hacadiuarasrarna fader aediar 1 qaearavfaga
fayaar ag aedlars , eT TaAqaea FT aa arqiaeTa SaAAare
wafa i. TaRaat qarrraraite 1 arf? aateqerrarraasar: afer
maaacad Ftafad weeted 1 arta faetqrceneaetcraavsarta
amrearatta [aft a] saad aerar ataaat meat sata a
aaad, AVSATAT |

OME COCUIG SILC BIC MERIC Ce REACT
cahecaratfedt fridtaaat geawaaet freq) amet wa
qaqa TaseaaT aT TAAL | ‘CaMAAH VT Sat: adNT TIT |
qene framearesr aft gel: THHSATTA ValTaeaed, TeATAAAa a:
GSAT: | Waal HaTAa GTR GaR_ Tsar: araaracafeega-
TAPEATTATTNT WH Tar fsaeat: |

aaa Toa ate: [afamaaftarateawaraat sya
aqeqat’ at saent aafsat freaqat Praca | aal areata
mamTaheaagaeriataferaqusaaraaracHata =| qed |
afamtaciantg fra ata wet GST waea TIAATTATEMI
qradet saqaiq , aaT ar aafesar geqzgadtaraaifadt water |
aaramaareaead § galwtaneraar ofraeafeas gaata-
TENT | Ta aAAsaT | gale TagaaHIsH Iieerag far-
aqreaairaeafera’ afamtaeatanarnagadaygara aerarat
waar farsa freeata | ae fafaansary | cana? Tat faqafa ar
warafasst | faqaa: Sater araTaaeaTa Ay qa
eaferareqit aet areata, aferrava aractarat [aa] aa: 1
qaaarearaaameatat | freerey | caemrararaTArieaferaataal:?

 

wareqi—iI, B.C. D. at for atfi
2. A. fa-gap-adargtaa ; B. waargterar; C. adareteaar;

D. adarataar
3. A.B. C. D. om. a7 4. B. om. wa
5. D. saatyarai 6. D. aqegaat
7. A.B. C. afad cafeaat 8. A.C. D. & for aa

9 AL B.C. D, at

--- Page 364 ---
wie: 9 ] RMN aTRTAIETA ava

raqiq ) ud eafaqarasaiarafead Tea:, Ta aaaT Tag |
MT QTAaTAaTAagaaHaaTaHaraCHaIIIA AA | HATA:
aaa sama) fediate? chert frtarerwaree saat |
qa afasad faara, ae gatareaftanarad gaat
qatazeqfeaaatiasaed aeavsd faceare | ageresafacarseat |
aaagq qarit otenaaaurmigats area tt

we Gt: TATATAAAL BMAGAMIATS Beat Tt Tar
fafasrreage ts aaft cata amet frara aatafer 1 cana
arsonal aia: fad 1 arseraena ofeaaarera faceted
mararadal aia: feat 1 wt aie gear adharaast wea
BaTeqaT |

[ ame aqsaaosay |
da atfad va qaaTarA SAA

Ans: seed aRTTMTAUTATITTATAT |
Hersdtared Dat efaaa ue

ware: Foeq aife: Forfe:, Tey Fale; Waray Ad
qaqa, BATA eT BITAT; ATIAUTLIT aad Hearaq | A
GAT | Fay FAW | HVAT | | ATAVSARATT HAA VSATT
Waa, wT | aad faderaferam | ateae: alfa’
aifa: Aearfa:, cent atear’a:, Haearead atawd;  ateareareet
aaeHaray | Ron Ae sy aad a’ Nord, waaT Mary satfa-
way TAT ae ae MoT | aq efea, afanferaia
qaqy 1 ‘wage: graigemrd sfanfar: 1 aaa? wandaraatt

 

saregt—1. B. om. [fadiaae to s¢aaq], same line.
2 C. om. ate 3. A. D.C. gap for 47
4. A.B. C.D. gap for 4aaarat
S.C. atfaar 6. A. B.C. om, vena ateae:
7 ACD. Baa agg
8 B.C. om. AaaT

--- Page 365 ---
ayy rivera’ ["er0

Tad sesiafe, gat salto amas fray arafeeary,
qaaale afacia aedarqaaaceacaes faatarafacse sft

wa faa ‘an’ gta seufasrarnPrarara sare feqsy
HSA aAe TAR, araenafafreqa | arta Freq — 9 fade aze7-
fatorsrsitargeratar fra STqeTT, ST aAMEEa fagy
Tat relat waut care, Torererfarray aaa ASAT.
sfereet Prasrarer: eq: 1) ‘erat ga: Perret geararrerfianeo
fray, wena at va ufrsarersceran, a 7 fanafasre-
WTA sft | waag VTE fagaa sate age. aeareg
feerrafassa 1 ade ateareetareg afria fagaqeadaratresd |
aafrangad wey faqaa eft) ar es) gaehaa hy TTA AT:
fasta fayarusd wera fa | qeqyt eqaaterorae, waaay
AL | saraferrrsat az ferarfaat, faq aaaeaterat wate |
at qd fagarqved gear aatsqmeaci qead | gata
Hose aftzmtanfearit Pad, wT ofexrazig
SaTe TR 1g 11

[ wasHaaarfed: ]
dferrargprasy waatarge—

AUIETUA AIT ATAIAITASTTT |
wary aaeary sale fF aftay Fafararar ie tt

arg: wlrgaagerfagamrteacr:, ATRAR ETAT: | ere
WAY AAT, eIEN OTIS, wey | Hqeay TUAEy-
Ta: AVS Hf, TTT) Ta TIHISa maTaTa sale
aaa aogerey aaty qayosarey TSUsseat, wats fg aftea oa
WsaTs, Yar) qa eqEATAat qaiama Bar sata, wa
qasaTaM, 7 Fea? areas eat gfe

 

sareat—1. A. B.C. avsard qued
2. Dy fate (? fear) for ta 3, B.om.a
4. C. gap for a
5. A. B.C. gap for ant 6 C. aqaataosy
7, A. B.C. om. Faq

--- Page 366 ---
were: 3 J feetaresearfer: R¥Y

qararrTanrose aire 1 aa Pafraritanterveard
Wart wade | Tt ae yeeareafafeaa: qraisfea? sexna: |
aT ae | wate arasemnt F gael aaaravse sata |
eae: Gt Te = gaEleyesrasTEAATSe wadltataria |
‘aaa asad sf fe afaq fafeeot' fe safe a 7
qatar X orarea faeaeredat frvtast sangarqesan fi
woud ? a a fraaan:, aause acaimaTy Tamar’ [dfaaTo, @ |
Beas Tey Mets ITT TTS |

‘arrmersaray = eeiiaarat § feared ? aaa aT
wfaerannvet famadt | sad a “ara meter: [afaato, |]
aft aa[st wfaar laa sraratr sfa afeat Matera
greead, Tar ate agarfadafafa 1 waar eas yeqrar wad
Bag saafaeed tard, asa a starereafnaeara | “ycfrfaad
famay’ [Tito, 39] kaa sara qeaTTTAaTyT AT |
waraast Yaa waa sasafa, adt fe wet ayferater
qalTey AYIA Asay | TeATPararaissescrear sft 1 2

[ faatraveaatizo: |
wart fadtqausasatarate—
AUMIAT FR Tas aAeyarta eau: |

Siqenaead Harta Taga ls Ul
HUSA 1 HINVSAL ATHAAISAA | WTAATVSTET

we: 1 WTSTaarst wee: ‘aqAUaTq arg’ ayq=IT |
aTVSTa ITA AT AER: ATVEAeT AEE, AMT REET
wea: 1 gaat afanwide gst, mat mand qeaTAT:,

ast wea gafeqad® | a gqqusaeqafeyasaez: Tale
ate meaft 1 gansta amet faetqiqaaqesaat: aati

sqTeat—_ 1. A.B. C.D. aay arfea 2 D. dara

3. A. B.C. D. aa-gap-da. Gap filled up with the help of
Ragunatha-raja’s commentary.

4. C. om. afe F 5. B, xeaferng

--- Page 367 ---
ave areta’a [ "eto

Sfaetas 1 ara a aaiveq sfaert afearara. ar afa: qra-
mecaifaedtad, grag | wa: a afeafta: ora: afera cat
maa at ade afery wal arafae at agaqqesagarr-
Faraose afery aval fadland warateat aga aedtara sar
qarsrarstsgdtafassa ae [waned], azar fediang ar?
efaittraers | wt | TaAITATeTHAMIETETIatT feaqquedd,
fetaqares aera, sara saaquinrat gadcSqar wTeTET
wrsrrosrearert afer gar aedlare  faetanosary |
cera sat | fagaa gato sai at aeqanHUsaT |
TEAST THAIS AST UT alerts ar fears wea

waa 4 fadqmvenerafeaae fagaararcauaat gat
gia— egeranat assessor dufiran— afe saranigesar
Wea sefsrarrMTAT TAT TaTTAAaT aT sf,
ATAAATTSA AAT | TT: TeleTaAvenerafeyaraed afr
MAT ar artegerara | qratafx’ qfearara CHET AAT: Ta
famtead, aa fatteer atsar aar dufeeq— afte carardsaar
wafserarisa aaa’ ogaasesqat oat oft, ssefraqsar
meat | Cafaasr HAs: restHaaegererealain:, TMI
saa att | faafernatiate:,  aemreraqsy-
wea faeionved] wexea 1 Te ae cee 1 athe
arat aT sar aaerat faqaraanars 1 sara FIes-
TAT TITT |

grqertreaa” wlnqeerfamteruga” | Tar aR: TaAEHTT
TagaeT sant at aqanmesafead arf, vada? gaqe-

sareat—1, A.B. D. arafa for arafaa; Cc. AAT

2. A.B. D. fedtagear; C. fadta ar

3. B. afavtara -gap- wet ; C. aferstarat -gap- aed

4. C.D. wafa 5. C. om. ez

6. A,B. C.D. qrafafa 7. BOC. araey

8. D. om. arg 9. A.B. C. D. q9sq-gap-37

10. A.B. C.D. yage-gap wf 11, C. gap for az
12. B. @ for vw

--- Page 368 ---
wie: ¥ J agint arate: ye

art: | uaNt faetoavsarfa faetqramaainfassgzaaeaeeag
sfagaear? | ware Vata agheadife 1

disreaarta qagat i staiggay gagat ware fastqaseaat-
Saat: 1 Uaat: Wares TAATTTATTAd Wad: |
qrarar[ae aaesaa | faetoaese gedtara’ | [va aie] caatea-
aaafearaata aftetivarta 1 a? MTRATSATA Tae frat
qaat ageaneraaravsatenia: sataar wate, aatstAHoET-
feaat faatcavse sada [Fla arafraratead— qaaicaaaate
aisi=arfafa | ga: feereta Famer ? Alaeaie gaqa-
fafa ststeare wasqaeantadteaheagerd, arrrakarry
ma: tag U4 laoreet aaeate | vaale arHTA Isa feraT-
act faaiorvsa sada saa[gatjava waa ga: faretaafeaa-
aranaaa: ? sarareato fated ga: eat VaITAVSATY Tea-
ages, aa iaaqsataatarstansd daraata 1 aaa fae
scHaaveaigaen aaa avi [aaa] weaquiaeat Tala
[faa oan: fratararaesaaieat qaratassea TAT TVA
qyyysaer ae: Taadvaaals dfaangafase [ grargartara |-
aay 1 owt faavauafaraancsaia fava saad,
gaaaqad 7 Teas) ‘ateeaahs gegen fact [gals |aracag 1
HasawaAaMalga THASAT U1 3 I

[ aarrt wraiar: |
TATRA ETH AT ATTA aT AST aT ATTA —
qegisaziealactatacatsateatheaat €24 |
aafigumeatzatacateaa VAST U8 UI

 

 

eqregI—1. A. B.C. gap for fadtaass ; D. gap for WE
2. A.B. C, sfaamear:
A. D. atst-gap-yat ; B. fard-gap-aaa
4. A.C. alae ; B. frara ; D. gard
5. A.D. om. 7; B.C. om. TA
6. B.C. gap: seqatol-gap-saF¢
7. A.B. C.D. afafat?
8. A.C. aeaftag: ; B. qTosafeafa:

--- Page 369 ---
a¥c marae [ ata

adistgtenfia: 1 aadrmec: tarred fearataarat | at
“qrarqatraatsa fasrtsafassea” gfe  aafasteqacarcaea |
farsa aiataat | ve prafaearre: 1 a araarte seas 1 oro
eat aq” [afsaro, ¢] egITT | Tal warasrrey? facaraareay |
aa: strat acamaea fameafanea [ero] gram art:, afent-
safmeaed: | wat afeareaen sro: acagrarfa famcafaarfa [exo | 1
aya Gale aaa sa Hrerareafeat wel seg [ gwaaATATT
araimeary | wa areTanTgianhreeafasaer: | afafeca:, a faferca:
ofafaca: | aatacfeaa: | aaleeaty maleate, afer aateat grea-
araia-sTara afatarcat eqafera:, ante oqtarsaafe aeac |

qar gazat fafarca: slemraarearfaeay wre ead, TeqTAaT-
gary fararaeat Tacataderaearg Hasty afearsa art quad,
afanfahacasdieracae aaea efi’ afearzafaaara zeae |
aeargaanfaferca eft 1 ten faetrndacaarawaleae |

wafedg: | aaa ptaanidafacatatteaa afafercat aq:
qed | aafa: arrattafacaca feared aexaea | ated: | qt:
gare Yann: | aafaady: cedfancuferteaaaa fas gady-
van Fararaat srqafa— ane soesama adie, ava wa
qaval Tataeacarasiaga: 1 werat fe aa qyzat eAdcale fay
mat aeahal Hale SaaTeTAT Fat aeaa’ ead Tad qrsTA |
agufas-safaafela atcarmad a artgararataemay | wera fe
AaATINgT TAT? AAT: SZ

mar eaten | Ud Tar: saat: aealaaramder: wfagiear-
taal sifuazatatraracteral atafercareacat qeard | sao
TATIAET BA: —

aqiat—l. A.C. a-gap-faarq ; B.D. afaatat. Emendation based on
Ragunatha-raja’s commentary.

2. B. sara 3. A.B. C. ator:

4. A.B.C.D, om. 4 5. Mss. add Waea after efarta
6. A, B.C, D. om. Wy:

7. Mss, 4Faa 8 C. om. aaa

--- Page 370 ---
we: ¥ ] vant wate: RvR
arTeqaniratar: ofe-s-a7-o-a-aterar: | [fTaTo, wo ]

aft 1 ydtattadfapagerfagaa ssarmaafesaaa, aeufaa-
qeeateaniania: ssaripucafenata ga,  arartgdtea:
maiaat: ada afeneta, warcaigdfsaedta: osaraia-
afearaan,” warate: arrateattar gad efa sma wast
gaat wanartgd ? afaq aTaaig:—varafgta wnt. 1 ga: ?
qeaat afgaara to aateacteaal geaisqaays | aataTafeta
arrgeaisgurg 9? gassifacsrafa ggerer arafsta aaa,
mar a var sfanfe aa [aratgltaratedt a gad 1
vasa [t]— araat facaraa: sfamat ar ager aeafranay,
qt aaa ar veo afaaeqqewta at a alafeemainager
walrarad | TAT Tera leareatearaaafaa | aa ate? sear—
vatafgta anizatateadt fasaaa fame at qed 1 sa-
eaisqera Keaateancad, wfae: gala qeaa yaaa Meastista
wrath

aaa Gata sateatrafaaesgarsaryt: = afeaecay |
azat—ate fama eqeauagararal arad agar facqerra-
WAHT: F Sl, Brat AMAA | aaehlse gereararerad Teaeaaray’®
vet swat, HAsea Ta: alas faa gaat waar eatrcsyata’
fama a auifaa Hear aa tiiasqeacamiaaay — aie UsgeaT aT
fargar ata atccyaraufaterstat fara ef ad-
erfasaracarr areas | gal apahastareacart ee aeeT aaa
qa | want gataqteaaaav ree HH | ATUeaTeTA AA eacacTA-
ugearatatad «=o ofeaetay , | aeaigaauimameared = wrarat
qeolea i ¥ I

 

enea—!. A. B.C. om. WANA ; D. gap for it.
2. AB. D. afearcatos 5 C. afenats
3, A. B.C. D. gap for amafg; C. tara for tatea
4, C. om 5. A.B. C. a for wt
6. B.C. D. aarat 7. A,B.C. D. om, 4
8. A. B.D. ada sez
9. B. om. fed eH aqtaateaaaata

--- Page 371 ---
Q4o mana [ ateto
[ qagat same: |
afediagataaraunt THT Tease —
qaearat trarsift a=araat Paaife |
atta gaat aaifageari stews ly ll

a ofl | war? qaiaa:?) aif sardifs aerarft | yea aareT
aft a yaanift, aat qagarary | Maratha aftearatat atrarfor?
TAMAS | MACATT Tarawa Tarsreara aaa AAT |

HANS Teal TMerarerdeaty sfaisa ? ya Tas ae!
UHM THAT A AeTeT | FTATT 1 TAY’ TAHA
slaved taracat aera 1 we Tacaeyt war: Marae: sfraet ?
mT aT aqnqarart qalaarat wera, vary | wearsy—
feqcaaiferikaaasfeat a mMeararmtty a set saafer 1 wet
weraal Mara aly aeat eteaatacary ainqaHre SIAAT |
a feacaaiiaciaaastaat ar aftagar, aeat  aftavacarerar-
aaararag farrdeqarea gpa Tey | waTaT TetrHTea iT
feaqcratartta: wat aay | aeaTa faratqiaat farareareraaeat-
qsatear Wararat fara etoraqdrre ga agar waa facarica:
ARAMTACATAT SAT TITATHMIAaATAsAT, TATE atarHrerafy’
feaerataqrifafafesa® | aa: cea wa? marere:, aera fz
qeaqe: faartaragt aioaarart fara a Gadd Teas Warsz:
TAT Vs | sat T—

qaisfianal Maradisegaa: cqaraa: casey: | Efe |

caer faanifa | tal TOMT CASO, AAT TaASATTAT
aearast [franifs areas soos: 7 aaiseaenter | -

 

eqrem—1. A.C. hapl. om. wal: 2. A. B.C. gap for qataa:
3. AL B.C. D, waa 4, A.B.C, D. at -gap- ra
5. B. om. War 6. A.D, aTad

7. A.B. D, wWeareral; C. wWarareat:
8 A.B. C.D. aaafa: fag a 9, C. om. a
10. A.B, C. aaat; D. aeaut-gap- afer davges aa aeer
qqeaey wa Ted eaearada faa 1 canarfa aft gatd-gap
-NeIgqa; B.C. hapl. om. faatifa to waaarfa, line 2, p. 251,

--- Page 372 ---
wits: x ] armen fa: Nq

afer aavter | aar geeqrateaer us qed casa feaacte,
wamartt to arfereaifa] sarerea arr qaifayarta 1 aetta | aut
Treararaaiit, araeeratecerfy ersarardacaite  eafafccarhr
aay | TeMaTaetia, Agat Hatter gatfagerfa, sarfeearfar-
gaia | aed aerate |

[ aegea faaate: |

Teattt varnt qatfaparte sarees car fafata texas
fata qdat' a qarfta ? aareta fafefe Aoaeay ? get
auraearat aan sole often: war ara wane safe aq
fatard aeaonaqaraafa aeReaTTa Tea ra ferata fe farang
aan aa qeararfecnisaaray aar dat farahexncqezatsaaraa |
arama fara aratarrareavafad faracfzeqat-
qatarrad wasaana faranenfaerrent 1 Heqafefesa-
careattaead | qaifagaaf afageel[sarfeaafe a geaa]
qeag araaraeaeraa fare afagfararsy® waenqazaragy aa
EMTTAT: WaT Tet 1 aT ara  sateearfaarata-
afarrarat: | tt afe afagatraseg a| far ]ae camardas
[ereg lata argioa aa earanaedaafta, gar ait
wea at feaaar: argisoareaeal qaraid aa: agate

[ aarHirafa: |

wamt—al avaeafaragen: afagant ayaa eaafeaa: a
ua Wieraaratad, Aa aa a afssaaa: wt gaia
qam— qaasiavarfay «= qatafeananifast «oqatarenal scat
qaaaeateaasat TAI | at sen sfafeaanadiaarar,” serra:
qaagrdlad | seas amas 1 at aatenrseTT
aufmay—ale carerdgera serrsaar” eqeaefarariagayya,
casaateeasaat faafefa, aearafaanad aaa) gaara:
geal ar fafa: ar easaramgrdaara aera ef asa Tae |
aT: ASAT: qatafacearandsare, stacy afin? feat. aazat—

 

earemt—1. A. B.C. D. adarg 2. B. om, Far
3. A.C. D. afageuq 4, B.C.D. t@ataer -gap- tag
5. B.C. D. om. a
6 A.B. C.D. atrat; D. faa for faa
7. B.C. om, gemasqay 8 B.C. om. Fafa

--- Page 373 ---
QR siren az [ eto

afte ausarhtsaesfararda aufaa peat gease aeafatarey
ofa fara wafe 1 gaanfacarfag aa aegae: fecarat
aga aar scosfararafaes: faraaaerraad | aa qatarz-
aafarnataseraria ata ae Pare |

[ wegen asaara: |

eaaareay fe qrad ara aedy seat araar erat
aaa: — waar aazeaufsamta sitfarranfaferay
aaa? qalearaurfraraearaed $= caearaa: FAST UIATTAMT:
qfeqaea 1 taar— oreanfas afeafe seca? ofefercara ta
qaia aaa ufatafe 1 cara aexafe sserea: office gare.
ufsartifeanar famatg ae qaearmaerfirare: | ae Teerfrge-
qadaausgary asqrey fawat fawae, weet ATT: |
alae feared 1 gainers sserfrgrge seer araq
eae. | HAI: AAT TSUTfMAAT A aTAT ATA:
aa: wsufagaaesrar wrareagregerat: seeps fasar frase,
wae oT: | ar qdagfaarivs sattaa caeooig slag
yefaain:, ast faafenr:, oscar afent: 1 ua afeartfeaerat
amaata: | ataar aaa qatarsranifafasrsisedicafaagaat
yada | aaat— afe oszar afearfs: qinfarsccateat aaa
aatsaa aaa F ferent att: antfa 1 qaufmes ye°-
wire oofata , aeaufrerafe vecfegareanta fire
aafed gaiaraefaare: 1 aa atsfafarse: pra: a aerTaTea: | TTT
art maat watt seat 1 ava asufageraersfafasceacares are -
ATAT aratsaeR aarara tiara aT AAT

ay afeae af feaat ataar[aleafaa afaate sexiest
afaortiaafsasra:, ez at gatq 1 aaat— afanareanazara-
faerartea: safe araesro: anadtar araafanaeitaiata-

 

smeai—i. Mss. senasarfa: for wAsaThT: 2. A.BC.D. mad
3, A.B. C. D. as1aa: 4. A.B. D. 4 fore
5. C. hapl. om. [ser qvadtat to gage] sTiea, third
line.
6. A.B, fraeat dt at; C. feat at at; D. Peat gaead
sfraq 1 aa: qazle qaaaa aafama: gap °° qaasifage
qaiaeanet: sfercar waettict

--- Page 374 ---
vere: ¥ ] BERET ATH: RRS

WITT: | aT sae afer: Hear [fer sarrafenrrar faatare |
qa a: 3a: & fetaae: | aaa ferasto aar aesicat wfavafa
ware qataeararhragnd sada | tar — arat aretat at at
diredafiral gatsexrarfaeraearrarrrtarrariaae: fae
afaafedl atarararcaraar aaa feqaae va aeslaq: 1 atsara-
fafasevaegearaicaa *ferasaeaaie Fez: |

aIaT WaATHaferaNraTeaHIaT BTA ais aeyTAT
qerar farad | wed aeatfamiada 1 aT aag feaareafanraeat
waft | aa: sanrdttafeartateradt gai | aga aT
feqannifaaaeen get sar, Tar fared aegaasre: | sre ats
aeHemaeaeaaeTal GeMaTyfad afa 1 TAieTTeTTVATIA-
sia sarartaferaarararg femteaqs gat az srrrat aval
aatinedufta oaag aad = saatteqaanferararaears
famieaa atateaeat feaasaifea:, aratsa feaaaorra: 1) aa
qarfantaat gard wares «= feaarcare = osfette araat
moat serait went sft, waq Ta alaataare: |
AAA TAA AH aaa seared ces aeqaaH aaa fayteT
THA aT

ay qyaqaareaeaistaneaar [faq |arcatsvgela ax
aft aaa saartiafeqragg stata 1 aaaie arate
sfatq araaaafare: 1 waged aged” gat wafa,
feqanraexiaaarays | wt arat aeraray arag aetaerar-
qmay | Gepareat qaearazareazafeat afe feasarrafenter
Hat wagerat aaeaina’ aifect aetiea:, safatemreararedad |
TATA AITTHAIAM AT aA HAT HAT | SooTqesfarqarfag
q asifeeracafenieat faararrafest faater ae[afest | fa-

sateut—l. A. gap. for fat; B.C. D. om, fea
2. A.B. C. gap for <fa
3. C. gap for [faraatst to araz] feraara, two lines below.
4. C. aat for dat 5. B. SAT for SToTTA
6. B. om. faaaarat to ataieaeal, next line.
7. A B.C. om 7 8 B.D. aaeqnafia

--- Page 375 ---
Ree sirerarrt [ rere

wimeauinta gataecret asa gaeaatearafearsar fea
sarefest fametq 1 avrafeafaesatecat aacruaaieat
gaiafanoread aa? fad, aafafreca arera [qatar IIATT
aster: | wanarfafaces area] qatearay sa ARIST: |

maraeafaa afaate feaar are aegised areata
MY: FF FH HAT TIM— yaararacsad wert Hal Ia
wafasee sfertg | [aa lore aegtaat [araer*] 1 rar atafaare
‘aifema ssufagaftaauad: § ratrusgeafrara ara
afepreat afamseara | seq? aati aufata aracarenay
afoeat aerate sfertfacaa: geet aeararfacara veufagarat-
aa: qaaq afestearaaraafaarg: 1 aa at afaafvar afcar-
caraatfafaae® cadlarfasaetisccanfe 1 feaasarmg faeter
we faraeafenrea’ 1 ca aisfafasesaea: a alert ate ATA,
ary qeufagmers: a afengq are sereatate |

[ axa areata: |

aa afer feaar Brea GaaseraT Tassel WTAAET-
waned, feat a aa az efe frag: stad Falq) a7
THAT: Cafes Hea, Ta afe eq
armafaaEet geal tarat aan TratwaeReaTaAds BAT TTAAET-
mteait 1 wa aafsasagere aaa sraifa wiaeTy |
qa weqaiaaeeracnia cafaaregigaata sfc req aest
gata aradearfafa 1 wa HeqataTeaTaReTaL | Ta HTA
cafaaregfaa [rata fatter |° weaaaaeat ata Hala aarHea-
waa qeat era 1 va sarfsarataeafawarraalaaerar-
faetTietteaearay TaTEAT |

[ apg wiafadkaaalafa: |

aq BeRaT-aeaMEsaTaegefersaiai:,  fraferat-

fate:, aatifaaagerfasenta [arg | oraexae: 1 ae aaa:

 

ameat-—1. A. B.C. D. om. wat 2. B.C. om. FF
3. A. B.C, D. om. aa: 4. A.B.C.D. om. ATaa:
5. C. om. at 6. B.D. fara:
7. ABC. D. afeag 8. A.D. f& at
9. D. aia sferea for areata faate7 10. A-B.C.D. om. ag
ll, A.B.C. om. 4; D. om. 4 F

--- Page 376 ---
vite: x J aaa Erafaakaaatater: QRy

qaiaat adatars faseqa, aatsateatater afarsta ar aes: area,
a fayaa: 1 fafersatatsad gearg aintsHaarata | WaSeay
may at vast | ud afefafssasatt as gaig areata
saad | aeame: wife? | ar ale qaiguta aexeaar AsiiaeT-
wat qatquaat saad t sar afeta weg: qatar aeal ASAT
afamraad: gairwaar) wt aaatet aarmagaia faeqer AST
alfencaniamial wrt seftiata: ser aleawncaTaa eg
farsa aeafaraaifaad 1 dea aegfaraghtaeqea: | auigarter
facara atcar fare gaia 1 aeafaratexgaiat aol:, Tceafaararg
afantat aed 1 afamtaeteraesafefaarna fare fad
aazavat® qafafgafacgar a’ aat gaafaarta cefargaafare:-
eqgdafaad | aeq aden aeaiarqrhaysa geet qaqa:
UIT: | aaa a PrafsraeTTEAT |

GAaserat: || Taste eTAAasaaTsHlaTaT? a
[feat] 1 wears: mSE:, Afewrufager
asa saad 1 aa aad fara aegfarqsarmng farted"
aaafed vata | aaaaigartT axchfaqaarna farareatshaanra
Heat fare Hatt da afaatageat a qdaq faegaafax.-
eqrqaariaad | cea aeafaraqtedes aarat gataay | Hors fartar-
fay arrafayesaftantienntafaferacatearrearara aTtg-
aroifaared: qataqad save fag Hala 1 da aferntatey
fargeta a yaaz adarfaaq 1 wera J sar FeaTTaeaea-
aasaraiat Tene AHAASMSIqAAIT « RoOTa IATA AT ATT
mramepeieay wea: oftratig: 1 ct ada fafaatgate
eqafeqrer aeaee feat tat

 

eqvent—1. A.B. D. farafeanat 2. B.D. waa:
3. B.D. om. atfe:
4. A.B. D. Warraat t at: 5 C, PRATT Ae

5. B. om. We 6. A,B,C, D. aaeaeat
7. A. fare are Bam; B.C. D. om. 7
8 D. breaks off here. 9. Mss, sqratarag

10, Mss, faated 11, B. om. atear

--- Page 377 ---
gue Tas [ ate
[ waza faa  Wetafaasiaa |

aa qeHasaelfeatsamrakaferaseas Teqzafaraaz
fafreatfafarirafeararpr sata: savat | aeat— ara
sfaaqatat qatatar gator afata ar ofeafeqareqagara-
valaiga qaaq wert fare Haig asafaeg: | gaigeta@rar uaz
shamiaaraaaegsraIMaaIesTsyages gad TaMafaa
may faeg Hat A ahatag: | wag hegrwausgage yar |
aeata [vex |aegaeat Afewsatan: | aaqartonaacaafeqear
aeafararqatieoar qared faartaa i aa wesraraaavsfaetas
qnifafad desaaiaary gratanafargeacagite: amiga feacar-
TAIRA STATA MAI aTe WAATSAIT yeahs 1 wate war ale
Telereaaleadaattat sa 1

[ aatfed aed Rlafawecar |

fafassmaradiataey = aegna:! | Beara fe.
faert | Talaareasaracarat ~Tyearafa: afemecag 1 aaar— afe
BRITT SAA TAASAT GHMT Tal ARHT FIV WA TeVad,
aa wa aa! afara caaieqa: 1 waaagqata a qa.
qoaqaraezlara wT ISATTIVE | WaT TAMARA Sat yeasar
afana aar aeeaa: afar e sy eat 1 aeATeaeRTaT
efaca waa feat 1 Caper a aPataqqeaeafacg-
watiged 1 afaia qeafeaaaifare:, aemit aarsfafeega aar
VEIT TACTG IH Tea, Beret sfery | SALT Far aeEaTT-
sfafeeat oar faery sre sqNaa, weTAT TAA | ar ga:
fancier a” fafeaaat sar gargagyasiay | sar a" gaqsat
SAT A AATIST SITAT Baga seqaAsAAT Fea FT HI
WT TIATS qreTAT THT HAT

 

sarear—1. A. B. dfa aa:

2,3. A.B. 49g for Waa; C. wag for WaT

4. B.C. aearguter 5,6. See fn. 2,3, above.
7. Boom, 4 8. B. aa for a
9. A.B. C. gavfaaao 10. B.C, fafag for 4

1], B. ax for @

--- Page 378 ---
rate: x ] aaem faanfaaga: ave
[ aezeq faafeagg: |

va wane: farsa giatiedanarea: afagaaed |
ua 4 fret Faad —

acaat tharvaad afa daa i
aq fa! aatfaaera | aifacoatser atftatate |

garen:” qaweaaeear wg: |
[arava feat, Ho 45, Ho Xo; Tatiaafear, 3¥-0.4 |

acafa a frat wadtfa ) aemaata fags wexamigah grant
afa, aeaargrqeat 1 oftfasersa artrmer: qaaraigafi< stor
syafeqat: 1 da asTarudieaatia tiaratiq aden aaa
aaad | Headgear: qaadaa: sar wrugamt scared 1
qayaaiyay Teataetalaeary saat farananrecdspattay: *satq-
WaTAaT aT ad Tt TATA Halaeaarara: | TATA Deaf afaafe
HARA WTAIVAHTAT TlaT HUA 2 TT AT FATT GAA: |
aaayat qaat a eaageTaTa ya 1 ar aeeatqaet
ginrakeaaes welaer sel a eAaTADTIA  Serqasfaraiag
aan faragauta: screed: afaghkfa at aeeaaqqarad |
reat afer ca Aftaarend wad | aa THAT tal 7
saracaatia 1) sad a waatiengry—

Was Aaa CATH FTA
malty aataqysaafer queda: enfes[ real fe] u

[aq] sorearatfeg carta cara edaaediie sad ag-
qreata | aataranta jaa 1°

 

sareqt—1. B. om. fg 2. A. Ort: B. a TA:
3. C. aff for 7 4, A.C. alae for wa
5. The commentator Raghunatha-raja gives : TN GIT: eafen-
wYaT:

6. A.B, C. aa eqreiata

Wo Are zz

--- Page 379 ---
Qks meant [ Tet0

wed! FqTETAT Fea —
eatararsardicary Frneregadterny |

gfe easaraal ea: BAT BIAeAA, Tea YAaca aeaae: alag-
afangig aarg wadtia 1 gt utd ? af caqurad: yaar
aeara: qrafanale F499 eqry Tar yaarfaratfag sexeaTT TAT
faact: cara qaafaacig, Tada: 1 dar ataeqd aefaraqy-
mead | Tear aq atteeaT 1 yu

[ qmadeataq |
arfenearyaeaaaetaraye —

TANISHA HIAMTTMTaKea: BAeaMTA: |
maaan waite: aaat Ta: Wy Ul

aifa saree aerator) dat wrat gat wqSat: 1 ARATE
[aft] ance: frale isacearia aera adista aeitaagen |
TUM AISHWA TTAISAT: | TTMISHTHEA, HeaAAT:, TET?
aATHISHWT | AT Fawasacaea 1 weughafeer: Hearfa: Tati
aftafser: wearafafied: | anemia: @y alate, der Het quer,
GreGTa: GAEITT:, AHITAETeY Sls aad 1 BazRrHTAAEy ferer-
araar qeatassa ? [gead—eaara |srareara; aan afrarfiaaiaa:
FACASATLMCATT:, TA TwNTAeASer shaq saasascsaias:,
vafaaata qaientaat, + aararnfrar 1 waar qardt x,
‘qag aa’ gate | aa fafaanat arr) aarendiavat ofserg:, wa
qfaeat:® fame: ? ‘srer-weaeq fararett, fareq eqaqemterar
water | aa aa faacataefa ar stat, aareaafa ar qe, aeara-
gat aeafa aime, wor efemrs ararauassa fafa:
vaqraart gfyeatea waa) dat dear: qfseat a fafeaacte,
aTa:, TATE TaATMTAT Wa | Vas a ofaear ae Tasearafeaa:
aygal + caf aaeat = Safe atsefqettqaraat faafe farcar

wqreat—1.  C. Weta 2, C. om. ata
3. B.C, om, a4 FaAIAT

4. B. om. He% to @aeq, two lines below.
5. A. B.C. gfaear gfe for gfaear: 6. Com %

--- Page 380 ---
wite: cj qn azaraat RUE

aq wanreaag: | qed cadifa sa, aera saeararfafge,
faafa qraataaisraal waa 1 wa ee aeET— HITT [aT]
yfead ef 1 ag | aaearcrazsrararefars: afraq
wera: [teaver atjare: eal aercrea] gertaeat | wT a
rquamatafasora ef Faq, Ma Ta weAT aT afsd Thee |
aenisatat laataattaat aaqaatat afasaararr fasofe |
genafnfaargadt qiia:, sa TT sraeaa | waat Ta: | AaT-
fear arsarfaat at macmaraTat wed qHaMaeaTTeT: | aeT
afesarardtat wear eatfaraear: ug

[ qitaged sifmat feafa: |
aT ATS — |
agenaeagqafea: ahaa: aaraa: FAA |
agie qaasaa: TAT YATE Ul 9 UI

agenarageraten: [areata Hae: | sfaa:, eater FIT: TAA
wile: CAAT was: easter sTfrPacad: | rae ala eaafeaar:
sift: qaaraaeaat sanaead TgeTd—aa aa oft a=afra
aa da dat ytare:, faagafe sfaatia warseatHy No Ul
[ qa aguaaal |
qasrraaararaEe—

maieaaa qaeritezratsat wala ats: |
feaaeadacent azataara vata anf: tc UI

 

eayeqt—1. A. and B. break off with a, abruptly, in the middle of a
line, in the middle of a page. C. breaks off here ending

with weqdlar’* qrtem scaTaeat (aa A caracdarafassea sfa
aq sa CTEM Tafa sheacws aeaTsaTa a a big gap
afer atsratfa aeara ***

For the rest of the work, the present edition is provided

with the commentary of Somesvara, which proclaims
itself, in its concluding verse, to be a summary of
Bhaskara’s Bhasya. Somesvara’s commentary is edited on
the basis of : F. Bs. 272, Catalogue No. 335, Acc.
No, 2495 of the Bombay University Library, Bombay.

--- Page 381 ---
Rha mer ata [ aiteo

grasarenifeeto farartrat [qa] atorrafadate) aa
wa qarraqasrarfearae seftearariraaaay Aes |

faagerdacen saifeqagerat treat | geafaaat wafer zifa: |
war safaar yaafaar, sear qaataarar: erfretafer 1 Fa GA: HILO
qeafad qaead ofeitaa? gaferaraar’l fea dacarfrartsia-
qieafegeagrafagett tar agihad aa: aeTiealag Us

[ qaany |
Toa Tas! qatacaera fat TeaqTaTs—
again: ward Feat 3az7 |
aaa aa aq aaah AKA Il Il

aqauafadier,, afeaaqeianfa: veg, waerad, 7 Ta
aegrearsta feat, faatet cor qeats afecarmeraractead cattery,
[ata] a gat sreqe waecargafe(feaar aar:] auferatea-
anf ata sfaaameartents qatar 1 aan fe agrear wift
antfrramft carta 1 agi somermarag 1) vanes grates |
aeatiad qia sreqa wate | feat satfaraat 1 qTear agate.
feqat at aaaste: guage a saafaq a wead, ate wey a
araaeafera ga, aig gtr atsed Teafeta cert 1 TeTaT fe
fAPAAET TARCATSATATAEAT: CATT |

ganearasiaa | quose arate [aft] sy safaatsscarag,
qiatmaarasatatacacefraerraareant = faery
qhavitsts fareqeaqt a cadivarareag: | aentaftdtart 7
fafeatagufer | aeATeaaT eaTeIT Yay | agtgeianfaaies:
gay: aaaedia fasted oats, ct alfa aah saerfrarfarcarta
arama aerat arft seat tft sfaettaarft qeafea; aret-
srafaat wa favaat waedifaa geste 1 seaeisit aerarfir
srpfearearret ferararaatea ti 8 1

[ qanrarny |
BATHIVTATS—
szmreanaiafad fret sate agar Faca:
ARAATAMT AIH TA AAA Il go il

--- Page 382 ---
vite: 99 J Healy Red

seaeq eaaaes [Gaareqaat | aat:] saarernatfaire
fred sade Sadia agar fact aveaed, wsaTishe franfata,
awElat amafeaat at feaste: a aweraarieae:, a aadtfa
agianahenn:, ag adda sfa ave, wate arora arafacsdt |

mata var: sega aafer cafe wasaeterar waeiag-
wena Zaha, Fea ATSTUTCAT AAAIAT Teaed, FAAIAAT:
ele fF 90 NN

[ Aeaday |
FATA TAS —
FeraamT: Taal azar Tela: |
AeCATATT TY WANT AIA TT | 22 Ul

Aad Hat ATT ay Maa, TAT AAT TTT: | NAHE,
sat Udi surac: 1 [feaaar afefere:], fanaa Tada FARTS
Sica: 1 [aeraaea wea], aead at [RataTacrdanafeqart |
Asien, aer wey wan cea [aaci-eaa | -qent-Tara-
qauT-nena-wadtit, afathat wars: 1 [adas] THRATT | ae
TIATTHTT ITA: |

ay shrfre: aataarat Fe: sare az Afters |
[agrat omraaered atadtrragaafe arfed, HACATH A
afacaft 1 wa yta warren ofenccra, agg] aq
aqSaneed aaATAT qearanranateafasrafrad aeatraiaTa |
qaereanaAeATesaaraaaaraatiafa: fragegea frag
aad |

feos gig gontdirentieadl faaeart AeaTet Huatta
qaaa \ aaataarat Pra oegdis:, [aa fagoteer: | agar [ero]
aa, aaa geaxdla: 1 aaddatareeateateraferaq | Fa

 

sqrem—tl. See Visnu-purana, ainsa 2, ch. 2, wv. 7-9. According to
the Vignu-purana, 84000 yojanas of Meru’s height is above
the Earth and the remaining 16000 yojanas within the
Earth.

--- Page 383 ---
RAR sirerrt [ seve

afe meqre: faaera: CATT ATATSFACNTYTANT ZEST:
[a] earat qeae aeorarara: 1 aeare fagaia werea afaat
asedifa fas [faqafe weract a afaar aeodifa dtataaT |
asaifaareara wet 1 af cagageaa wale gal yea |
avareaa arenerind, serefrescara 1] TeaTa qaeaear | aria-
aa] qa: sare faq) aa aarraes AT: aaeaTATas aTfeT |

[afe safeaq werrarr va Aevafasst aara fareartad
gaa | | geartecmfad ged, waar frweata ga,
a afg terme: | feos afe ngrsarent Fe: cara Aefwacieafea-
AT RIMATSU UT AAT aT AV | TeATUeT HAH inerfehraeree
Ua aateTaaT AaMSTATEAT 11-99

[ Aeaqsarqaat: feadt |
aq yey Ae, a7 aT asaTyahreas—
CANS TAMAS ATH ATTA FT ATA |
HAA Reged WRIT TAT PrTIT | 22 Ul

ea: camiqafera, Reva, camer | TA asaya | ATA |
HALA HAT FAT, AW AHEM, FY TILA TIT AeA v AT:
want qun, watsearanacfeqar aaa | gala Aa
facat favar aa wax cant Fe:, aa afaia faaar aa acat
asaya FW qR I

[ saatfe-cqaert |
THSATTATTATEAATT SATA —
Bea at agrat atscaaa: afages frzge |
HMA aaalzat TaRhaIssrs: ard Ul 23 Ul

aeifafaat a sea: a ca feagefratfaaraeraa:, [at
agama saafeadt fragey] 1 aengtaasteni, 704 TET
gzfarfaaiges: a ot aaatfefrarfaat earg:, Fat TEITeATa
qdeat qafifsagait anata. 1 at wgrfrarfeagaa: a dae-
frafaadua:, sat werdisrem qaftfragait Garay 1 waAg

--- Page 384 ---
aete: 4% J antsed qrargzannit 283

qaqa [raat lerategar: warsaafaafaat Fat: geeTzaet-
WMAATATHTASTTTTATTT: Taafqaeat: 1-93

[ antarea-anat |
QaTCIT AMAT AA — .
CATAT ANTAL FRI TAVITA |
Salaal ARIA Taq AAA: Ul ey Ul

PAMMEAFATULA TAAEAIST ASATPATY ABI aera.
sagdait caafegat 1 qafefir: °3S, sami: FES 1 waracaeaz
aqafeqar | ssafatt coaaaafeaalaagir: aatat fava crafegat |
aSaA, TET YaTArTeT TTsaTT 1 yohes: TsaTATT: *28 1 Tar.
qaAt aera sortzat “ee

wEhuaacmMataat  aeaqer-aaT

earaita eraferarit 1 gsafarar sate aaqe-araraae-azhng-
CHTATVAT-TAATT AAT TET |

aa WET HUTT: YRET-Taakaaerat wafer) q4-
wreqateqat: sama ua qeafar, wat sareacHearrTtag |
qari [erafeqar: | fate qaaka, aacata Sereacned farcry |
raama-aataiaiqacat: aufaaeq— ate wairseateratsrarta
araed meas, aa aainisacat: fefafa, aaaterntactereaca-
aaa watt weaterarta 1 cataeaaat fadeqafeqaisa-
faearfeeagray | Teareacrearaisahs atareararlt a: 1 Bupa fz.
aitaaaga usairarie | cat ale eqrardgearactah | at qafefreaar
gseradaaa Fa, eqseqaftfa: 1 ga: afe] eqseyatefsar az-
wbmeteat tarracatoadt: at wftafefa Saraccna aaa | qaag-
aaqfafe 1 4 i

[ aataea geageqarat |
area aaa Tara e—

uaa ced Fag TNT TAT |
ay yirerd yeaa Fai gy

--- Page 385 ---
Rey Tran [ "tet

Wat eare: YoaTaeaeaTes wenavia, yey | ada aitand
SANTA PAT | HEAT ? Bg tara arate: aa:, agiisgataaa-
qaraefgat ea: an gfe ad afaege 7 qd qamnesafasngeqT 1

wafsaag: yMaqeranig qa sart caferfasrcerfes
[a] aettare | qyssferaes gee: serfeaqaraanfooit afseatte |
aa [qa]sea sridtft aatfearia qeafa, gearegteafrarts [ Teafa] 1
ua qeararedtala [Mare] Tergarauafead quay) ataaged ater
TaqareaUa Iz Yearmraifiray | wacaarat wha 1 7: Gag seq
aqraaneas wate aeoasarorfiag TeaTgead wats 1 faarercraat
faafa gt feaar: sya salfaeas ceafea, [sere] safe cheer
fafactararen gftrdafa 1 ofagt feaat aan aden faacaea
qaate

[ qgsserafeaarat yeqtaratraqsseefafnat TATETATTT
aad feral gtac, fra ada at] autaay— afe cfaneqrat
afseaigal aeaed aa Taarasa Ta: Yay Eeaeas | asa fey
waar gat feratstar fa: 1 qy i

[ Awavaquerat anawanaag |
weasatgatearfaat startare—
cat: arated waaseted kaa: Asay |
By aac aeuaenge Far 1 ee I

[sae Aefeaat tar wtiaca sat] ad get seferrafa
waa | fadland afer satfrvaneartacqasaficnaia aearqa-
[feaat:] sar: veafeat [exaaaaral fexctaarant: sfrareafe
qataat fe Anrsaqadeacahaneay 1 a Feaqsary arya
fegiramister 1] qanertaar sremfeeraart: | aa faararaafa
ata, [aareaate ar satat] 1 [a car tearsarqaeararaty,
qfta: aaa caearermqaeaaia | |

UATaTTeaaT wastdadta vata 1 afearqer:
SIT Ta savas aart aaqgahafke qa, so AS
serena gat wafe 1 ateato aft gatsaarsa 1
qagtuamaraaeterag = faa aferra:wararaeateaa

--- Page 386 ---
eee: 45 | ame fafasaveert REM

areatge frara ett var arsreqer ay fagarariste: gatiqe:
sfaaradt a Feearat fafasrasa: | wat ASAT SeITAT aT
wept: SfTATAy 1 9g 1

[ targefagauiat feasarny |
reasargaen: feared are fa qeqedteare—
eats Sar: qeaeegled ef aan Far: |
vimard Rae afen:, garde FAs: ie.

en aerated Ageg geq uly UAWa YT efsants
wate qonreatafeas:, waft tae aad fafratatd ate
wafralcaaaraenagq ofertas gah 1 ux sar af
vaaahita aagard qa waa afammita yey uf |

afmaraed faat: afar, ofa Tegeafa wfaat:, aereata-
frarfat: foae: ofaat atared asaeefrerg. Varaedt art qeafea |
faqaraarareararagt afaat waft [aa] CUAgHETA | Tat
wat wat afaar sfararfag geatsaarad gar agar frat
reagan, Uirarratenseaats, weafie: cao ufrrssa-
Fea: sreargefat | waeaat geitsg:, galt uAaERAA gteaedtiitg agar: 1
giea qfed weqaazeqad araq , aadtag aq: qeafta 1 ad
waa fera wer sattfafa i qe i

[ ame falaaaosaq |
ait fatarsasastaratg—
qaiqaael qusaag cleared Sz |
Faas andes ral aterm i ee 1

pies aeg atari | Tea Hedy ora athe
TAMISTUOMTA 1 aT eat qeqerose Tara, aferoraer-
anf argawnsaqqdass aftacafetay 1 falast anaedei
Tasagq wet Tata 1 wATeaiamfs ahaxaze feraqeerafra-
tafeae feats eeqead | wai aetaqaadt 1 aa Use ara yeay-

Bio Wo YW

--- Page 387 ---
Ree med [ Meo

eanat wead | sfatafa tfeagead | nt aite: advqsaungi
afexafasst 195 11

[ senosaR |
SH VSATTAMAN AT —
Tainan an wa 77 |
BAUS HAT aq Taal az aafaa: isi

charmiatataseaterare areas tae aa aTTgea-
Sa? 3 BAT cewarant wae ate freeaae 1 ae senea
eaaq | qateefernd gatrcaifeetcaay | fafaarearmdea aed aa
charmacfataseatanaenta: atmrearamgsat a HIVAT |
ag HVsAy | TATHISAHAISTA | aa Hose feqaey Uae aaaat
aera |

fagata seusafafasattecnferatrat: aaadt a ea
fagad satoerusayafe ferfrrniisafacse | TEA TAT ASTI
waterosa [afar] azaaafearsaridtata qeareequsaa fa wal
seam | at fare saene ada 1 afte gseqoseafacra:
fafasrgefa | asa waratft 1 sat afte ufserdad
maraqen ferafra: aradt 1 aed dufeay— ate qezar
aenfacead, var azaaafearfa: feats aT TaTTaT
famatd 1 are fardtaq 1 caqaefefa aqafeaart ator
fearafimtiaet aaqdl aaa: | aa ae <fafaaaraedt areata,
wfseatsat feaa:, aa fangafeareay, TqaTTleHITATAA |
aT BsaeA Sat aesar | ar fardaador fafasarssHraay—
afe emrardeaa [eatarigeat] axsar aar faqareaearereraradet
tft framraearetuariqear fiafasat aead 1 aea: ferfrsarar
frqararaasararea aigadaaata fasorqeat 1 aa aa Bt
arena fafaseafe sir [aalaveaqarrea anearefaria fe-
weattrgart [arearaeaea] aa: wanted oa: fafa
441 aa afserigat fara sraerd ) carataa: [fafasar 1 aad
aufaay |— sataar gceqerar finfasar aeat saranda Pathe
giamaaategeraracea: fafasarrarcisasay wale 1 aemry ?
wat: Gegftewrn: | wa ae eafaarag genta: 1 sat aearfad
saaeaT AeA 1198 A

--- Page 388 ---
Rare: 29 J TeAvee qe 4 RY

[ arvarterar gez: feala: J
sea faeraears frat ate—
ginkiamrat afar & |
waa ara Feat afta was B37 Holl

qaiartgr, aardteal a at tar, afactaceat ai a ate: |
ayeaT | warat Vary wena: cH alT:, afery Be get aa qa
aTat AIA: |

aeard xceqara feveqaeay) ga geet efagqaneagq qafa
ar arat, aa [<fa:| seared actif ar aferrr, wareaafea at cer,
Taradwas HUT AAT | TATA Ae | TSeThrarfaat sar Teae!s
tadata daafrarfeaaaea 1 aa wees ast sat 1 TeteraT
TaTATATTAT HE: TfaaTAT | Aer WAR Aare: gar faagefaar-
faarger: [Ta Veaseet sgt sat] 1 aatetar ast eaearargact
ae wa amalcataty |

aA samara aaafser gaten[stret a] wai
waa | wa sat meRsgat ad sfawfa ar afeaar i aq
faatft at stati aamaticeaqea THaTERegaga TATA |
at afarmat faraata 1 seat favagraacaatapaeqaqaga~
mega sae afer Tt [sara fea] sarerar Prareaeat: UR olt

[ eenvedt teats @ |
[qenrsd-qaatresacaertg— |
6 “he e rot
GAATAT AAT TSAITA WENATAY |
Sam IAUT AAG sat cag GraVTAT | Re Ul
qenvsd [gez: cearaeata] vetfegaa [aaa] | aa x8eT
wate qalea ee, ae agecarer Tfefa:, ATA FUASATAL TAT
fasaryda genset seway 1 aaa ueqrafead ue SRaIAIST
wate. gadqavenafe | aausarertetania SALT aT aa UeltH-
qa ast: aqeqa a) werrapent gee tateat fercad, weq-
warrEeat agit fart sf 1 caemeqred ssaTTATTSATATET
UAAVSATEMT TEAAT | MeATTAAT TTA: anew Tay faceqay |
qaaraafesr: gated faatatsatate 1 teotiedcuferaria-
varatagiermientgaiq 1 Real qTactsiaaara: yeafea

--- Page 389 ---
ae sire [ iete

araseeat: | aaa TT Terat farteast 1 Resrifeaear TAT,
weer ets faasd, vet aris gdéfratfirdta waite | qatet
wert watt) aaureshrncaga: ataedt aS lear fayeater
aad: sfc att feat 1 arate caesar sscufearher:
gaat arafatira sear facreat fad, mesa wath) uma
THladteamamieed eft AP leddeneqay qe qenfafa . aearg-
wrasse eMasgd anfemfaateMiage aneremerae
waft 1 dex sitar meqsdfa seqd 1 aexeqrqarares faarrad
fage frat 1 oadt faavse gaz: caisermrgafageer sar
ARAETSAT AAT | AAITSA HETSAT SATEATAT 11 29H

[ eadag-mMaaay |
ray aaT aT RAT TTT ATS —
BMSHY AAI TAeTT! TAS Be MT |
aradaaded wag cara a aretaTT | 22 II

arsofafrd ersad situate: gdag 1 amare Tay
saa [at], vdtarfaafate | eager 1 ance: gar TRAIT BAT
rarmageda warrafarrereeng, [agar aaa wader: ]
aad aaTET | aay qarft @amsdt wate: | vaayerfa farce ate
ey wata ? onadandfifa 1 afer a cantayaat a ¢ WANT |
mie TST AA PIATAAA | BITAARAIaTA get safe qa
waa | qa— skerfesfgacaaiaes sergeants
alaraitygearia arta 1 fasgafeefritaeart aaqdaae
era | od ot oa ad A [aa nea fafsaqenfeag
afearaseat qearqe ser fad wafe car eafiar sated aa: ad
frat | atad Targes aafe arae qecareeng FATA TAT SAT
Traarasia | wa apa Tea: aerdanNaararaa sats | vaA
Tatas TMRqaart gear aaeamaea safe Tfasey
Tag HAH Ga stars xfs BA 1 221

[ waaay |
fagassatseasfaqreatate—
ailarane saa Peewig wirardq |
fagsstarayst aearecTaaaR: BYE 1 BZ I

--- Page 390 ---
weiter: 2x ] Rariat ergteat: RE

qaitad qe-norraaafeqacare qterdeaeay | aitandts
eae ert 1 Aa eqaqgret aya: | amtand Waa KTTTy | sands
fawrvtg t qat qamfaer gatseefritacteafatcd aaaaferg
agit ufmarrgaq 1 gatéar arfirezar faqtq 1 aa
gation svarefaaearis 1 art sarqarfir 1 aeatt saraitr |
awaratseay faneqan: | faqasstaeraa | qqqcsaqer fagaat gator
magqemratsaeracaaa xqeas | TeaTeTATSSTT YT, weaAsAT
fagassafe qatar: 1 aman ats. qaraiafatiranaacan: 1
ar etefefa | cag ma saeite | aaqvsaaeara afercrarersargea-
SIR Tartans qeat ae aga Asaacas: | wart feataeT
qt ant eqradfafe 1 canerarfs geitard aferasariq ar.
wfenseraear Keqttar 1 23 0

[ earaterarafacsea: |
woaatichrisfaretare—
PATI STATI Har TATA |
aagaahamaraadeara REA Be
Tar THA SATA TACT HASTA AY ait: | eer:
wrat: | GT eamdeaamter [Haq] aga az faaza sate afta
aT wettaer facwent wafe 1 aafasar ast 1 saan ah: |

vargattatraga aeardrerardfasner: | gafafra TT FAUT
VAN, efarraTes shart TARA 1 Vw U

[ Aedlat agtear: |
THAI TAT AT .
SSSI AASUATTATAT BUSTY |
MANTA FANTASMA 1 Ry UI

secsat gf Agaafaqarasay Tara 1 wathrifnay agra
saree CATS aTaAaTCHET FAT: | POSET AT: HBeT:, Ia Ar
wrarag | aafaaim: afer, [ard aera aad] aa eaeterand
qaqa [ase |sarfarifing = eagiteraneigai waralaeaalaelerarega
wefaccagaamren: | ameter aes aadtfa arectnaa |

--- Page 391 ---
RV0 man’ [ ‘tee

[faqara |srsaratsarg qareaosararss foetaae | at frpred
agers: 1 [et] aereastsararsarq [Aareastsaratss
famata 1 ae qqaeq agleasra:] | crete wa AT Tg] ea-
TTT AAT UWA

[ fafasar ]
feat: aaaferfrorearare—

eerangiaaaysal aah eT ar |
cent falas azafgsa Rafrat at ll ze It

Sarr aay yforat eeremaginag [seraayfirary | reat
arata Frat Ga cattuanusar fafasat wala 1 Taserpaasat arfz:,
farfasar as, aaigirye sof: afar wath | qatrzeafernart-
wiaaega asar aaatfearaar sazat 1 fafasiteqveaateat
ferforsrfa | aar faafam: aaqal | qalafrargrtnera faced
[ferfasettet sarjaq ar reel 1 ee i

[ eatartzat: ]
waqerara a faqsarats —
seats f wana Raanza |
TTASARTMNEN TATA PALFAT: || VW II

saafa aoa anfe, weg safe aame:, TAT UTA: | aeeRete
frame gaa aylaaay: chad 1 aafeafadorfea sted:
TH FATT CHT CAAUATTAM:, Ta: BAT syafeqaa Playa eat
Tiss caters eater faatete 1 Ae
eemaar afar) semraagrat Hageara: | washe wet
warenaafa | arenafeaa feats 1 sarft feaaqraseaia
pielaeTata sea aglaar Tea) Aa atetaearqaTat
smear afsar seaka | ater sf 1 salen ator
aeaadiat Aegyfrgzar:, yeata afsar: séefesnear: | wa
ualesrr garafeaaaait | sal WHTHREMHAT TeRAT ATCA
Tarhaga: aT Aqsa frbeqafeqa:, Ja Ay: stsraaha

--- Page 392 ---
wets: 26] eeeeraneg: 04

qaatanafacraad | ca rat faepres | waaay sqrertar: |
aactaeeea: [vais |dearcara fatotqrsafa 1 aarazca-
THVT AS | CaeTATeaT SqreaTay: |

fafasat carat = taraleraragzar ARSaT, «= aTHTSS
ACA: 1 Gay ATlat we leragearanr: | eaaeruaqad:
sears qatameraa afar: smite qasacregqaa-
srorreteat faatrte 1 qa wate ater 1 gaataedt weqeat-
wauta aad fatter ga wea: faa) at fasar ghia
aqdieraad amie afsazat feta aa waft wa caratz
ufaratafest fernrrafesrg sft arate fafsar wdery |
ufargatenta: faattrniar waarmiaar ager araea
seam fageg: aara: Marta: | At fara ghd saardteraea
arate wifaayeraay

WE CAAT APTA TAT | VAs aT
fama AIT | eet VATATATINT. UF TATYATATT: gat aor
farmer fawsq aed wR: | wATTITTgaET: TEPatzaT
faafest:, wea afeat:, qafaarareen wafta 20 1

[ seeataase: |
[ Penraneraraaaraare— |
weresat falaseraraneal Har |
Peararaaad aeT TANT: Wes | Ve Ul

[emda lesa feanaagafearea: 1 sale fafaa-
[gersat lat aqaftarnavaceaafear: = [feavairvafeatea: ]
fateg facqear: genvsaraaafer 1 at: svoitser sflat area
aaasaay aeaacmaataafagar fafaaadafe 1 [aa azifa-
aq |— afeeqrardtave ea sot wate caratzardavsa fadtfr
fafasavsarad: caraterasesarfarehtag | arfasesataaacaatgat gear
feaeaniq canara faasq 1 faqaea qatet macs, arent
ary wsHyate |

FRATSTATATTT | Wal VSO STAAAT 1 Ta Tsay
ward eearrgfes:, weTHTA YF WeeITAAuaTa ea:
qarT: Hales aria wend | qexeaTal ard fafasat qrasat

--- Page 393 ---
R08 aterat { ‘rete

aia aaatartafrerearsret: garg ar watery | we cargtera-
sesar gran fagacana acl gsersegtata | waaay ATeAAT-
faatrafeaisat ataasarfaraafaccat, araagirat carerrat
aqua fasatara [faasa] wegafea: 1 maar at srewqouearel-
war ayy fagacmvyTeqrads ATT | Het TSH: |

feaanacfeataat a aeHa afd eared we_egraray-
gfagaa wat ae-weadaia | fasargfnal aragac: carelera-
sesqT aeae | aaa farfasar ateaa, afart fart 1 adit
sqTaTag etal CATANIA AAT | AsIeT HSSTATM A Ataayd
afar dt fearatesrt: [aaa a: ] sag atest: as i

[ aeraan |
WSTqITaA ATA S —
Agassiayfa: Gee: Teg: WUatTH ea: |
BRAMTIBAT TAUA: PANSITTY | 2B)

eeeneghecaraeranes:, fayassqar sarsitqar afaa:
araha We: aeaeaqaretand: gaa waft 1 TSlcaATUA
MSHA AAaUAiiegd aaaeaaaea[ ga |fafa

fafaraosa osiacaftaatg cfarrgat oat aatarates-
qeaeat qaeinad aeat, fadtand araq [wataratcogesraz]
TAIT TENA | AeTaTMAITeaeAgqay | Tea Aaa
HSHATEATAL WHITWA | WSEHAATE YReA araq ya Fear
wreaigiie msHaeaaals aeaga Bot: eararafafs 1 yeu

[ watar |
yalraaaare—
qeranastarieestatgat aa asd |

Sal Uraga ArarHlat Talat fay i 3° |

QUATT HAST VPfaaAeaTSAT 4 3R0 | aTAScET LaTSAAT
afrat [ecat| weata ferro, [see sat] anior wale | gacreaia
fagea sate cferia at <ireate, getet a feleorrrsaTaee 11 Ro 1

--- Page 394 ---
rete: 32 | weUTEANeS: Bod

[ aaweg: |
FAAS AIS FATT AAAS
at figassatar Az fagagaaraga aegtaa |
fyassrat fara Get Taigt TER 11-32 tl

a ReataTaRSaT TI | sae faqassargeat
aifasat [azar] vata, aar aearg va afaar anacset fasta 1
faqassat [sar] wifasrsssaar sar [agar] aAnsargatT
atfa | [aifeaatsssar ar | fagassaar Gar vat annvsa fafa 1
[arfapiosar | adiat favassaqat, var [gatdtat aafar] arama
ylorar fayascan aT TANISATSH ATT |

qaaanrsaaTaaate aa | @  fafasisniaratseanaeaga
TET, MHTAATMATTAST: TAATAIse aa aA saga: TT
TAMVSAAT TA Tit HAA sar fafastaant arava aracaeazy
aa AAT | Tat: TAMVsafaeaeat qa qeqt aa weR: yaada
qaiataregaaa | wgedtwedqaicagd alaarat = weaqy-
apiardeay | TAMISaMSHrasaa Ala: TAA fasaAT: Fa-
qasar vata i [aa asifet] acarssatfaea:, steerer ssuta-
fagd, gaifet seufaad, aautet qalaqe <favafer

gaash— anat yat aqaafaer feafafet sear
qifaraiaaiset q gaiqeat: fag wear gataxterar: = afer
[reaTqrasatqetsrat | Tala fare saeca fargaaranrig Aaa
qunriaad | aaanqdy | wala alaar viet: TeTATTETeT
AAMVSAAATT SL TANT AISA eASaAy TeaTeA HAT BTTITTATT
THATS AAA ASTUATAAIAT | AHMATTET TATA Fa
AFTACAA SHAVSA TAT: | THAIS T aed grat aaavsa-
wegegrat wafa i afaoite aAaveaiziaia arf it [ear]
AAAISATT TAMA: UU 3V 1

[ Reaesy: |
FET BUSH SAA TATA —
Fafamrgaaartat ar sat at Ww WaSRSR: |

FeqTaqarasal STAT TSR aaa Wari
iio Bto RY

--- Page 395 ---
doe maa { mao

fafasfaft aaafernaceatcaaseara A gaara TeaTET-
feaa wat afatareagt at sat ar cea: gesgeafa | aT aeateavrrsat
MM TATEMHAT CATT | MSASITET LALTHTATAT FANTIG
afamrattet TaTAT 1 SAT Tet feats | A aTaTAT wafer 1 aeReT
faatagafagar aaa wafer, oat faavse weg: Ud Aaa:
famtered 1 ATH SaTAAT: | aut [sat] aTATTSAr | aaTAaT TheA-
earaterared fafasaar eaat sararea fagagalertaredyot cargterara-
wad] garg frgacnigd name: agaasat waist 32 U1

[ aeetqsat |
qaerra faaaaarE—
MASHIMATGIM AATAA FA CATT |
araeasarEcaaige = ARTI M33 Ml
WeIsA F SeAMAT | eMtaasa aa: dak: TVET

emaamed 94 Wale Ter Heavay Fellatage eaHtaT eae: |
equa at taaerneraiara: TAT: W33 U

[ atfasat J
qrrfasarratae—

HEFTTS MAM AIT Fea TTT: FMT |
Fafast ear Fa EMT aA Ul Be UI

qeageieemMaq¢ed at canlar aafavafe | gama
qatar vate | aeasataasiaat: dat sqragaga aq aeHeAsaT-
gellaareye gaat fe wafa 1 ct qanrgerafasarrepant-
faa gear aaa wat Targets sisat |gaeiahreqeacaray
garatfecqead | ‘fafa ear gama’ ga g ‘tar’ gaa caalg-
qaettenreat arfarelad | qeatenig yy. fafastaesey cat gear
Heargegeat 2 awteema eqrard [ges ace vata aaa: aefte-
qm ANAIsAHETIA FalTeattem: awifa: [atat] act at afer,
aaa aTtermeate cfartaciaat: gzatter wea staat ara

saat faaseafa aaafa: [aa mMarereart] yqearard-
[aca larat fafa qineqrat weanerat + [waft] 1 ad-
HeataTersal qaneneasqar ayer fasgar waaay ay

--- Page 396 ---
weite: av] arifervat - Woy

weqsaranig faster get ufenenrat saeto:, Tat AeReATAT-
weqeat eqiqasaar aye fasqar waster ay cqqeqsar-
aig famter ya aeaneqat | ogaeg: 1) qaeataterarfafa:
afsaawaraaia qasaatrat famed qt qanenrat safasar
waraeartefaeaaraaratia aesecat faeter yt
warReaat aafasat safe 1 vameatorafs gert aaqves-
meaa «= ammaaia: 1 sat [ ae laa aexea otaaa-feqa-
cald aeanemrat qafarateaqara gan aesfare aad weqa 1
aeany J aaarrea: 1 aaTe feqaer gE: sqTaTesgeaar
qafasaa yeareaget gay [areata] | wate afer:
Tata: waa [=afa:] 1 [aad azufray]— ate
aqraragera gafasaar serearsisaget areaat [ ara]
aasearaereranfasaar frafaf 1. [gaya aufeay— afe]
epeaiaaaia fasagert: wat ara, Tat gmfa[ ara ]-
aid: fear sft 1 wa saa dufah fasot araarc fede
qrareegereara [ary ga] tfraerterasfeqrare qoranre:
eReaTATHT sare, wae fercat: 1 qafrcesafeacarrat fagter
aufaaq— afe [feacge]qaarato ofterisa: [arat, aa]
aifafacarfa:: farrea afer 1 ase ateat wafea, at: ceri | Sara |-
afeat: | gaan gaat We: Beaat Aa: | ATA TAT: TT: WE
WTA | ATH TWAT Aaa atarafestgerarett FT
wfasqetfa wa: sfacaed 1 vataeed araftaad araafaars: 1

wa [<faaeaat:] gaatafercar: seat aerfata ata: 1 ate
tfaaeaat: weT[ St] aafezed aaa: aan [<faaexat:] afafercarat
faasisaat att: 1 aaisaafatafe 1 Tat Team aeRTeTTAT
fagier Raeq afamMacamsar aaasaaa gfoar fasarazar
faa: 1 avaafafaaort. anfefa att:, faafefs faatr: [ege-
faeia: |] 1 egefaeittsaafateia sata: 1 car araaear feqeaeratete
weafaaiamier ae: cqtara: | aa shacaraqtafa: 1 eretqed-
araqatearaty = feqenigadaa 1 aa gadevarare faster
wap feaaryaraar araq feat safe i ate ga: seartta-
feqcad Heafaat sfetta 1 gaad alataraaneqatanafentatr
fearadgqraiad i ad Iateafaat sfc qaacaravafesr seater
THeAaradreaty feqcadarad Hat at BA ga: feat araq
fert waft 1 wd feateafeaadatatad gagnftaaria
weqreTgaeat; cra famada wat farq | cagtteaarlerat waza: |

--- Page 397 ---
Req meray [ titete

HT TTTHTASAS AraAaleaaasT Fe Perens wpe
wafa.

‘amare [eararasaria gar] avaafter featatad
BAT WsasAyT sTteraT vata afata at YaasaTHTeS-
qeasat farg gear fargeafaceqaqa sata tar Faiq Teaser
wafa | [Ga:] wet qvsateg ora neasargeagqay ad STAaT |
ameqsgraveay | fasaravsasftfetargearg qaea weateqnrta
area HAT aA FeasTAVs TA qatar ACT
aferoia at erqearad | TeHEasaTATaTyS sratTsaralfereasar-
most WaT |

[fasaravss gator: seasarersageasrat] farg Hear
[aatearnearg laasargetsat =o gaatcfaegefarta «= [seo |
farqarT HIRT aRaweqaqaanaad = faeqaaead
waa | awrady i aa fefasged aa seit cfaeaeaed-
RerIUaga wa HoH:, eatelar _gaetqsar afe:, Tcmrerwey
aisary aaa tafealraitd azeacued gafasar ar gaia wat
fafase cast ata fasqtaa way ul

[ sean |
JRACATAAA area TANTS MT ACT T aT TAT ATS —
says AFTHATA BATUgTTe |
Sey yaqReaAy shat Taqwa Aes li By It

aarsat fadaqor aranaaar Ga facat: | sdefaatt saafera-
Gee MN, HART aaAR 1 aa fat Baqty wer sag, weana
mente | aeTaTga Caster Harare UW RK

[ aaaqany |
waTaMT gr aaca sass —
fiqarmaqagenny Reare tary |
TaTMTAgaTAN TTA TAIT AWA | 3g Ml

 

1. For a similar construction, see Govinda-svami’s comm.
on MahG-Bhaskariya, v. 23,

--- Page 398 ---
wis: ta ] CHUTE TET: Row

fadasa aoaara faetoroeat 1 [faetorasat aot ae
az fatraraqng 0 faarearcarferat Tae, ATH TRAIT: |
seanng serasary 1 | faster cea gfrat ufsaaga-
aaencaaartaead: 1 we Ufsargraeer age” ?
searngemamartnsaraa | [Ufraraasea] searsai
aay 1 catadge wa 1 Te feacar saftafecst saa ae
afast aay ata pe afereisat satiated aa, et nea, faett
afer acot wafefa sect at gfe | mend qeafehaetqaaaiag-
eaaafce: stead, seareanafafasa: famtead; frataafaretqat-
earag ala sfe fara 1 aaaarnt eaterrearaathee A TAIT a
meareaaaayr: WW Re Ul

[ acafeeaed agree a |
arg feeaeren ata ae —
qa aaARsHaTTEaG at TARE |
aaa agit aa, aimed weal a yeaa |! ge Il

yaad FeaHISa TI TAT He, fageaTAsTETATATahA:, Hy:
qfaadt wort, qearer am: canrarfafe | awit aext gt greater
softfeaat ga: wacfeata sare grad | sett a yeq afer
graafa 1 mrenvasararaefea, ae: Hea FTAA ea: Tat, Tait
vat: fatal feaeT 1 30 U1

[ aan-neqata: |
HET TE BaeT:, Tealaqaarats—
CHEM ATAKIS WaTAEAT BAT TATE! |
qearat wared carter geqaeay | 3c Mt

eqe: afra: egeafnre:, geared Titaarcararararearayry
aay oaifecd, crated faretrartrear qaraeat, war sfeereiteg:
aarshuen vate 1 [sane qhorareaect oeteeat gg: gat] azarat
sfaafa an afaay gai at wend wala | ad: aaa TaT-
neanfaa wate egefafastentad aa aa atanafesr faster:
aaa BeaaMaa TETHETET | AIST TaNAsaTT Hale

--- Page 399 ---
Ren wren’ [ sitet.

egefafaeaaafd at aa araqufear: faa, arfaeng
WETMsSAeT WW 3S Hl
[ qeearaeia |
THOTT —
qwrt Raa gated ¢ cya
Pass aed yah ae
Wal taraat wefafeat, <faatraad: wyeysy, qafnd
Wane qoxo afr, xwaaalfaten <fayatertat: wrqo,
GoXo, WALT 33 eo fant TE aMaeaendtded galt qveero
qitafacrearg T37fF |
wad alqeararay | create: wéhat YA, Yeare: WSH:,
vaqearaaieat tagenafane:, wadlrarat: megrésaraal-
wartlafe sérsorareigqatracaay |
sraft: TalrearTEAs | VayMAITa: Gast Ta

qaqeragqagrataa aealag | ToT BATTAL ATATAT afasmeat-
TACIT 133 1

[ anat fasmenq |
WEHEATAT POAT TAT ATS —
Saag eae aq aarsay |
Taran fad Fay aaa wafearaq i vo tl

QO Ve TTA aray qaaTalaary | TeaqTaTEA
TRO MARHVUT 2¥Q00 AAT AA qoQAve wlaraaahar
STTA, afrerrty qoy%o yf wsaqrarsedy qv2q2o fawad ase
aaa freee: Ene cate wRReaTat weararfacneay wale |

ufe sexaITTEAT eae Bxe5 TAT gar TA fasHea-
da feafefa ast [amfasarant]frcararry coo 1 92 tt we
rantargenatanieat §=6Uaaerteafafcarmaaq 1 | ¢faeara:
VeIo STATE Bva5 Thora, wast vyovcy we: cfaeT-

--- Page 400 ---
waite: ¥2 ) fanztutaaag 08

HAT: FZ loo ll RATA: 39Y eqatesT Rv30 That: Bexar
HY B¥RO9 TATA AataPAT: 3Q1qo i vet

[ feacautaray |
feaeaofarretrate— .
agirarratiad: aiatarsitd mer |
Raeriaer qe Ft aearafeaaag tee Ul

gaging: awaeia arzaafacas: | aca ala: asaee-
aeqatdgfa: | teat: afeal fadeatnd ater 1 TeTsasts qeare fade
aft xfareisaafagafaga: enefaetat wert 1 aaa yet feaend
wafa aay? wmafeating . aaaferdingses aarafcraten-
TAI TAAaafsatterreaaty autes Hy —afe carafe
afafaagn sfteatsa: avaed, [aar] feaeadifecaia: fea
afa feaeaetafear avaed xq

[ fanatataaaa |
ud fanatiaray | ary ?

qearqraraiaer atid TATA |
farsa aarqa fae nee ll

gedaan | [feacae] fae: ect med ata aa, cfraexcar
afq cqanliaatiaat: feacadafentia: Scat ga: ereratatat: fret,
arsat feacad oF araafaarery |

afranior sqafaeead | arefaraararaa aaarfraq |
aq Watstay | aat artaaadgeta wacha ata Feet aT-
aifaad | tl wMTeTarcaidaveay » adl afar
qatar HeaeaeT afaiat at faatrget qd sare fare Hate
aaeafafaat gaifrad tat galq i acarqaiefavecaeqand
Hash tat Aq 1 vay galwasawd aay sega 1 aa
arqaia wp, faarer aT) agifavarqad stfe: feacadfata :
qa weataraatmealaraaged weratenal: Pearratad, Tar
mremenfaraatarra: wt:, fata ct aati aaifatage
aife: faratefafs wei

--- Page 401 ---
Ree mrerata t tere

[ aexex queaaraa |
TEANITAMIA AAAS —

aa fear ofiaercasataria |
ITT HT Tad TRMTE Ul v2 I
ufafacnemidatnd tHe faoremd qexfaatqrade ] a8 avqez-
A Bat 1 aeNME vat afeta at avada faate:, aar
aaea aa: Frarauad wale) gar ga: faae:, Temsafrara
facsrardifaamratirnt wats, aar araermainaa fara degrercerer
facta oieda: weafats amtmeatqa fread aead 1 arara aT:
weer 7 Tad & wafararg faster ta orasart aq
WTATH SAT it wR i
[ eseatfaa-qra: |

RseH AMAT aT eATATS —
fracatattary fafrentcafiareqery |
array AqeaTeRR Trae w ye tl

faetaad: aa afeara, feafa: eouiaresg araedier:, aea wed
feacad, gcrataatad gseaiad, Tena | aya [aq] accatatected
araaaratg fraieay | eeaarfaat aet safe |

feqoafasenradd qaaraeqe gftegd fara: 1 atearadt
faaiver facatcnmer at gaan qetfaad, gat aol) [ ataexet
aaaalferet Naeaeatfeat aat wafe 1] azar we
sfaset ae: WY UI

[ naaAAA aaAAAA a |
aTaATTATT AT TATA —
ReMEaATasa ateadsatieaed Ry |
Raerikqeaeraataaang wet Wey i

wear gesiyia seat wearin: 1 qeqrefacarauaaea4
weaTeuseiead | ca wreH Ie fafeafear fearaig faateat, wT

--- Page 402 ---
wits: x4 | RAIA ATA F 254

HIT Atay fears | Heats STAM | «TIT Weguet Aequta-
faearatieatest Tag | AT: TST: ATTTEATTACHATAT, TATSATAT
afanat eqaferat quia, adfacater eqraraa wer famrafa |
fama ata aoratiaatape SHAAN, aaistwaNqrea gaarat
afearcra aaia, AITATT SALT; TMTFHTMT FA: TAA SALT, HILT TT
afemia acia | wa faraer qataeata sate afta aafa, gat
feameer aqayzad | aa aeRt qeoratal sfanta aa aezfary
quand Taaaa TAHA aealataqaaryt sat wafassd, AIt-
art fart 1 rorcaciet fara

faaat tfauet aatfenta wafa 1 gat ga: aeaaT aTEH-
waa aferar cat faatrea faftaqaa: |

feqazey fearadn, faeia: | aa: feaaed faeivaare wafer,
‘aa feqeaetaeda fasta Sera | aeare faeivamng fadtaararraa—
wea | aE wag, aatcarsifeaciafeartqaaTy |
aaameds aifea:, faufaasta sar ges are. fazfwatedt
mar tlaaeat wataied? waa: aar [qaaarr] vat feaaarq t
wHalatarat car [gaat | aferot feaaray | semasaT Tear
yar fasargat arfearqerarsar agfaragéari SALMA, aero
aferry | arcaqiet g [sacra] ferred aierz |

aAAsaAETS Slatay MageAsAt TatTeaaAVSaeT [ATST-
AVSaey] ATA TAAAATT | TeHeATgeBATIT AAs | Wasa —
AAAISAMEATAAEA AMSAT HITT | GAH HITT faraqd-
at gato sfaratad, arcane aferrt i genta faraqaart
aaarTTAT See | RT Me TaTIT | MATA TAalarorry-
areal faracaa sfaurad, Asal sat, gaat afay | waa
naatraan aie: Fag |

TTA ATTA aA faa | THeReT Aranda
[eraavsd = fret] 1 sma gexdea fart ander
[sarartaesa | gaiqz-afernacenfgd [arg] 1 waraaaat
arssiger geafeamint faeafefavery: [a a] | sarees
afataiaty at aqavsanear | carat] aad frara fared gaiq
aa: Feraft qa ata) aea qaea araaedahadta aeqa: TeAT-
gat aterta faett aramcar qfeaqarta ateat aa faeg Haig 1
Ado Mo 3%

--- Page 403 ---
RaQ , arr’ [ a0

eng farat: Feasts qa ata) aa grafaca eqafa Ta WIT.
wit eaat:, wexem fase gaart eget: 1 [ mealaratercg | accate-
mesa vata) efaaat eataad feat artaardafcat qaaq
Tag fat aarfem, saagt fart vara TAT Feros
qa vq | sa mecha waft aa eat: | Marae vfaret
qaart, wameiscwy eaed sarit 1 aa: Mahrad gonfes
afag:, vara fart sari fare gata Temheamiga aa |
wa arerctcte eget aa ater:

wea weqIgMaad fadtcaaat 1 arqatiaves afer
fadt sat aad gaa, afro gto, sat fat, sat aad qT,
afar gam saree 1 [efaaatt fade TAT |] TENT arEM A aT
erat aTertasaTaenad Aermft qd dear tat Haq |
Varga Fareay afagienfed, saxex Std, fad gars
aay fag gatq 1 TenTq weRfaraemrarda [arerfard |] qusaq |
malara sag qed Fea |

gserftaa,  ssagnreqnalaetafaegairor ACATSTTTT
TyaTataqawnad faegaaeqgan ad sata 1 [ae] arer-
faratearait: 1 aasearaacirat [gat]  Fearearfest WeF-
amifaga wart aa manart eqaft aeare areata ofeter-
MATTTSIT TAT |

faitaitaftaan: faratafacatia: eseqraaenciarta gex-
arafafirar fata eatfraer vy i
[ wefaraeq ac: ]
[arafara jaca feoreatarg—
TENA YH: BITTE gt aay Fem: |
Baas ire: TETRA Ml Be

RUT TTT, eA Alat, Matt wer: wafer qveyet Font wala 1
qrsret Taeaalaedt aatTs 1 wwe efea: agenarscant-
wet | Gat aaa fara Get wala aar adare:, aa afrerae: | TEATT
TUM faazartemed Taq sera vafa 1 wae ga: adar
STAT: ve

--- Page 404 ---
eile: ¥e J omarratar: Ro
[ warded efaagey |
Tena fares —

aaeqaehaiseerart aqeaATTA: |
WAAC AERATED TATE | vo Ul

gigiiticha: piney | warifaraemenam: gelsoratea: 1
wateiacrany | lems: weazeaeqafeft | area ease.
ageraseraT fare gaisatter eft 1 avefaraearsenar:
—aTaaaraig. faster fq gerqreraef: | Tarid eHefaetrantare yer
favztafeafaaafacar wafer 1 at: ofeeyor wTearaTaT feat: |
at: era feat fadtata 1 atasfr fares war 1 at

N

UMMAH AAA: 1 Yio 1

[ seaadtaa: |
Tearad rarest aTsaTs—
fafeiaaing Raaz clei sarees |
Uiagenraia agen at i ec UI

falas <faea, aalait: fafirefacia: | aeare tit araaT |
wahgainfeeg mete afearagdtara ad arcagie arerata4:

qWhred aaanisrqrasas qaamfgaarastetir
feaugeeafatad arate acai fea: aiaere: sraqfearr-
MATT a TAIT | TTT fret gear fassaraarat-
art darht aa sfefaset ga stadt mead aa Paes fraeare |
qaqa wast atseatafear aearfear wafracat. | ar
vara wqraaus waa 1 at va eHetla afar: |
weatergamnada assartafafira [<fagay araagq )] qateeart
[ar] eqezfaatia:

aa Feral sad afaate qatear away qraetents frets,
a tain: at wd arate xe gaa
qamsetistrs fet wae gay. afear: gaa ey | faafear
wafama 3q 1 sro: aréar: 2. at: aT aalerar safe an:
R1985%, BE Roe | VARA: yocaTTSATRR; THTSH TTT: |
udarfeart fae |

--- Page 405 ---
Rav wirerer’t [ tet.

wairgaisaraaa = yatfireraareagrrearta | gatedara
ag ofa aire sree tategata: VR, Aearey WAT: ¥, FlaT AMAT:
42, SeacaTieafeacat: we, aearftag fafa: vo, mezaeatfeag
AIT: we | UT Clea Fat wa aatora:

FoRSURooYS
WEsqooos

gaara: asa — aaa — efsanoaaraedy
Ve gsseses mera mea, Tar gal aan | aA
¥32Ro000 fara sf, ase qr ASAT. YBAZRRE |

aaa aeegaasfarasa ofafed aeateaqTaes fag:
ara: qagiqanry | vat Uae qexieradeat wat:

RAR
43
RR
QS
qR
aatiar:

| qqXarvee
RAR | RG g000

udeatifaay— adafeaq [cia lara caraeat [aes
aat| waa, [aar ga |efraroaty fara: 1 saz at aeRTeaT
STAT: WY vowqe | farfaameT: qusVezexoo al Fraez-
WATT: LOOKS BBE |

afmarcaaaarg afraraeat frater safrsergea WATT: |
ay ofa sitet aexagetfaatat wT 43, UAT: 3, ATT: 42,
facat: 24, fafercat: 33, vege: 3E 1 Wa BAT aafoar STAT:

qoRZoowoqe
Wieggoooo

waafeaq waar ocataat 3° 32ects2s qerfaat
aera, Tat FAATATT xQRoooo fHara gia, aT yAse
TEMA: YoRs3qqy | ARATHMT yooxggeg Frater

--- Page 406 ---
witer¥e J ogerreratera: | Rak:

Re Teo gr sa: REWE | Ts Mtaratarahs eae a tT
masatn ae TTA wareT UeaTTATTd Hey | ATTATTAATT
weAaTa AT AAG: |

gqagam: aeaaay | neareafie: wrararaafaterstac:
alaat faararada veafarer: caaecafrafady fata 1 Ga: seat
qarseana: sdlearqaa: aarada fafrat fatnfeafafe: erat
aaraarahrinaaed ateteaatot waft 1 gata leer ATT
ferrearaaita 49%, JRA YS | Td: AleAHA: Geovsquxoo
at acat meet ayaMrseraTT wae |

zaqaa[ofefs Jaraay 1 meargearaat tia ater afer
weqaefaot fate aeaisies aevi, aaqy 1 va sfaferqrasa
az agar ane feataafa, cena TAGAY | AT: qt
Braaeaia | qernalad reais ernatlrafatr ulaat maar,
ae csadeaq | ataatratad ufaat fata, aediea wafer
quarnasat saiTed fasargat za: sfefetale

aarsaafefraary | qalearrare Eso cat aradifaatentta:
amen waft afeararaarfrarfrearfa: tecrfagaraater et cated
feasedicnfafaar adery 1 a emema: | Tarealfararerr aes faery
ae anand aay al | ws sereqTATAaT qaaaraaaaaa nt
feadaaft | adi vfaageaafcfiraraaa 1 oa sfafad gate
qrammearaegeas = fafqarat TT | aT UF aaeaged wate |
afer TAHATA ASAT AT FAT APEATTA HABANA HAF |
aaleaafrarg]— arta meade UaGsalraAr, TAT gaat:
fafafa aeaterarefafe: |

area TaMTTATTAy | aeIeT [eatateara] AeTIET
araq fexeadafeat: aeragTaTeTAr: AT: eHeqanfarqaaea oT
quia, ssear Pras, fearcaefercar: ey: | Taal arqaieaate farater
ayer qa aeafadta: 1 a fasarea: armfetace: [Reo ] arfteat aa-
array | ca arerafe [fererel] msamantsatarard tafe saafereaed
aed wage at vale, aera gras ead | ate salsa
favags yard epe, gest saree faster wale aferorfrett
fagaat ward fete , grate aarg famtrta | a are: TaN | UF
eafrat WS a vaNeTT garatfas aTeACTAAT t THATTATZ
aaay | TeTETHTATAaTTT aT: | TT: srt TTS: |

--- Page 407 ---
Rag miter [ site

waa aexer ferasgrrar afagqecad sated 1 aem-
caferaexrrearat faett: | AE srratate

qafaaa: araat ufaaaartareanat oma araar are
Teas eet Ta: YR 1 Herat qexzararad uss Hy | wea-
CHEMI Aeanaqaaga werney 1 Ga: qeafaaiia: werareard
weary | crane ag faversaa | vs aad ated are ana
wert ferteafe. vl cafe aitenies [ ofefir J arerrz |
aM AUPAUus Tefaetqarad TTT | SATTATAAT AI TTB: BTA-
wrest fray | atar ag aseqifescaot fataear fedttshr fe
aracaa are frente, aaeat eReafea: 1 aT FETAMAAATAT CATT
aar weaTHsaTgahe ve:, afrar Fz aarat aaa TIAMAT TT
PI: | TEM TAeTat Teafwat T aaa: Teaafehe wea
MAT! ATTA wernats waft we HeaHTET qeTfeHat
wafer TART Tatat THe ATS wa ys I

[ aesara-deacna |
wrote car wet saat ana —
ARASH ATTA AIT AAU: Tass |
asTMA Ae Tat fare ahiarar tl vs tl

eaay TT AAT | AT YAN, war aq | met aaa
TATA AT AA Tea TTUAH, THs te, SHUT MTEAT |
frend freflag | canara castor afa: (anfa:), cantata at: car
earaferar aaasaaagare aaa Ys

 

1. After this F. adds :

a saraart we waa alae + Hea HEMET ARAT-
Varner HadaeilormreTy ce et aT efteraebReTAT
a atsrmeaegengartat areatat seatresa angle wet geraet
gat qdt weanyateenfareatat saa aargcarae 1
Tanta & afer sara agonist fata stsitsaafa-
wafa 4

It was not possible to reconstruct this passage satisfactorily.

--- Page 408 ---
ate: Yo j sfermramenfea aoxfeeratt dey

[ sfarsqaefat zosfanaq |
aT aTATATS —

marly areal TS earaead aa Peay |
GSAT: TU FEI Wasa ase7 ll yo |

aTanertanrivdtay | fe aa? atarcacafasetaargard
TIT: THAT TT eaATAGIIT | a: gd eaarqanretfaardtaniada
marinara waaay | eaaeea TcedaT fea cara qoilaae
qeearssarat: meafir waht 1 arsarnfasdara ata
wet UT | aaasitsaraia at agua gta: ag
mrad | ae sfewoae sfafars a: wife ae qHaeT aTgNTT
wort waft i) Yo 1

[ Masaasaer wqagreate: ]

ererinfanas agiiat gad adtand
awa UMfsgeaten Asa Lorear |
aTalaiaaeagqataataat area zeatzat
AAT: AAT fagea tha aed sass wu

aft aavarfafamradla aed aareay 2

1. FF, ends with the following post-colophonic statement :
UagStaT aA

wat: Tat fatiaea fagat itfaacdta:

area Teat Ys af: arfgeratfag: in
UL ateeq nn ReaTTART ATH Qony vfatand ara Faraz
aferaanyaatst weal qaaat = geatat  fraaraatit
HAMM SIAATATAA TATUAATAIAT aTTTSezavarTat fearfiaa-
fad qeata

aed aareaay THUR a aT AAT

ated afritisgad sfafed deat + afaraT |

aed aeaaaend a fg a faend gtataaq

a4 dele Gers fet warded gent aa:

--- Page 409 ---
gee areata:
[ Alentarsaer sqagiesete: |

laatfexandsfaareattt
qawagqaryyetfaartat 1
TarAMAM sa MATHS
aI HASEUATATATA 11

fa mented Gal atdacaeaTey

TANS: AAA |

 

1, This is the concluding stanza of Bhaskara I’s commentary
as reported by the commentators Yallaya and Raghunatha-raja.

2. Raghunatha-raja reads faav for fearfa
3. Yallaya reads #29: and Raghunatha-raja Had: for wary

--- Page 410 ---
APPENDIX I

EXAMPLES
IN THE

ARYABHATIYA-BHASYA OF BHASKARA

1. Squaring of Integral numbers

1. Separately tell (me) the squares of (the. integral numbers)
beginning with 1 and ending in 9, and also the square of 25 and of
100 plus 25.3 [Page 49, Ex. 1?

2. Squaring of Fractional numbers

2. Tellme the squares of 6 plus 4, 1 plus 4, and 2 minus 2,
[Page 50, Ex. 2]
3. Cubing of Integral numbers
3. Tell me separately the cubes of integral numbers beginning
with 1 and ending in 9, and also the cubes of (8 x8)" and (25*)*.
[Page 51, Ex. 3]
4. Cubing of Fractional numbers
4, If you have clear understanding of cubing a number, say
correctly the cubes of 6, 5, 10 and 8 as respectively diminished by
a, 2, sy and § (ée., the cubes of 6 minus 2, 5 minus 3, 10 minus yg, _
and 8 minus 4). [Page 51, Ex. 4]

5. Square root of Integral numbers

5, I want to know, friend, the square root of the (square):
numbers 1, etc., previously determined, and also of the square
number 625. [Page 52, Ex. 1]

1. This example reappears in Yallaya’s commentary on A, ii,3.
A similar example occurs also in Somesvara’s comm,

2. The example numbers refer to those depicted on the res-
pective pages of this volume.

3. This examples reappears in Yallaya’scomm. on 4,ii.3. A
similar example is found in Somesvara’s. comm. also.

ao Ate 37 289 -

--- Page 411 ---
290 APPENDIX I

6. Square root of Fractional numbers
6. Calculate, in accordance with the Ganita of (Arya)bhata,
the square root of 6 plus ¢ and of 13 plus $ and state the two results.
[Page 52, Ex, 2]
7. Cube root of Integral numbers

7. Tell me Separately the cube roots of the cube numbers 1,
etc. Also quickly calculate the cube root of 1728.1 [Page 34, Ex. 1]

8. Correctly state, in accordance with the rules prescribed in
Bhatasastra, (i.e., Aryabhatiya), the cube root of 8291469824,
[Page 54, Ex. 2]

8. Cube root of Fractional numbers

9. Correctly calculate, in accordance with the Ganita (of
Aryabhata), the fractional (cube) root of 13 plus 103/125,
[Page 54, Ex. 3]
9. Area of Triangles

10. Tell (me), O friend, the areas of the (three) equilateral
triangles whose sides are 7,8 and 9 (units) respectively, and also the
area of the isosceles triangle whose base is 6 (units) and the lateral
sides each 5 (units).° [Page 55, Ex. 1]

11, Carefully state the area of the isosceles triangle in which the
two lateral sides are each stated to be 10 (units) and the base is given
to be 16 (units). [Page 56, Ex. 2}

12. O friend, what is the area of the scalene triangle in which
one lateral side is 13 (units), the other (lateral side) 15 (units), and
the base 14 (units) ?4 [Page 56, Ex, 3]

13. Say what is the area of the scalene triangle in which the,
base is 51 (units), one lateral side is 37 (units), and the other lateral
side is stated to be 20 (units), [Page 57, Ex. 4]

1,2. Exs, 7 and 8 Teappear in Yallaya’s comm, on A, ii, 5.

 

3. Ex. 10 reappears in Yallaya’s comm. on A, ii. 6.

4.. Ex. 12 appears twice in Ganita-sara-sangraha, vii. 10 and 53.
It occurs also in Prthtdaka’s comm. on BrSpsi, xii, 20 and:the..
Trigatika of Stidharacirya and the Lilavari (p. 154) of Bhaskara II,
Someévara gives an example which partially combines Exs. 10 to-12,

--- Page 412 ---
EXAMPLES OF BHASKARA 291

For finding the area of a triangle, Aryabhata I states the general
formula : Area=1 base X altitude. This formula is not directly appli-
cable in finding the areas of triangles in which the three sides are given.
In order to make use of that formula it is necessary to find the altitude.
In the case of equilateral and isosceles triangles, in which the altitude
bisects the base, the altitude is easily obtained by the formula: (altitude)*
=(lateral side)?—(base/2)"._ In case of scalene triangles, Bhaskara I
‘makes use of the following result : If abe the base and 5 and c the
lateral sides of a triangle, then (altitude)? =b2—x? or c*—a(a —x)*,
where x==3[a-+-(6°—c*)/a], and a—x=Ha —(b’—c*)ja]. This rule
occurs in the Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta (xii. 22) also. Brahmagupta
has also given the formula! : area= +/3(s—a)(s—b)(s—c), where
2s=a-+b + c, but Bhaskara I has not ysed this, perhaps because it
was irrelevant to him, Or, perhaps, Bhaskara I aims at illustrating
the rules given by Aryabhata I only.

10. Volume of a Triangular pyramid
14, Quickly tell me the more accurate volume and also the
‘measure of the altitude of the solid of the shape of a trepa in which
each edge is 12 (units). [Page 58, Ex, 1]

15. The length of each edge of a trapa is given to be 18
(units), I want to know, friend, the altitude and the volume thereof
[Page 59, Ex. 2]
Aryabhata I’s formula for the volume of a pyramid is

volume =i (area of base) x (altitude).

Bhaskara I has suggested no improvement in this result, His contem-
porary Brahmagupta has, however, given the correct formula.for the
volume of a cone? ,

11. Circumference and area of a Circle

16. The diameter (of three circles) are correctly seen by me to
‘be 8, 12 and 6 (units), respectively. Tell me separately the circum-
ference and area of these circles, [Page 60, Ex. 1]

 

 

 

1. See BrSpSi, xii, 21 (cd),
2, . This example reappears in Some§vara’s comm.
3. See &rSpSi, xii. 44,

--- Page 413 ---
992 APPENDIX I

12. Volume of.a Sphere
. 17. The diameters of (three) spheres are known as 2,5 and 10
(units), respectively. I-want to know their volumes briefly.’
[Page 62, Ex. 1]
Aryabhata I’s formula for the volume of a sphere is

volume = (area of central circle)*"?,

Aryabhata I writes that this is the accurate value for the volume of a
sphere... .Bhaskara I too holds the same view. In fact, that value is
not only inaccurate but also wrong. The correct formula was given by
-Bhiskara 12

13. Junction-lines® and the area of a Trapezium

18, (In a trapezium) the base is 14 (units), the face (i.e., the
upper side) is 4 units and the lateral sides each 13 (units). Give out
the junction-lines and the area.‘ [Page 63, Ex. 1]

19. (In atrapezium) the base, the lateral sides and the face
are stated to be 21 (units), 10 (units) each, and 9 (units), respectively.
Give out the area and the junction-lines. [Page 64, Ex. 2]

20. (In a trapezium) the base is 33 (units), and the other sides
are each stated to be 17 (units). What is the area thereof and what
are the junction-lines ? [Page 64, Ex. 3]

21, (ina trapezium) having 25 (units) for the face, the base is”
Stated to be 60 (units) ; the.lateral sides are 13 (units) multiplied by 4
and 3 respectively. (Find the area and the junction-lines).5

[Page 65, Ex. 4]

1, This example, stated in the same words, reappears in Yallaya’s
comm. The same example appears partly in Somegvara’s comm.

2. See Lilavati, stanza 201, Anandasrama Sanskrit Series
edn., p. 201.

3. » By ‘junction-lines’ are meant, the segments of the altitude
: through the intersection of the diagonals.

4. Ex. 18 reappears in the commentaries of Someévara, Strya-

deva, Yallaya, and Raghunatha-raja on A, ii.8. It occurs also in
Prthtidaka’s comm. on BrSpSi, xii. 20.

5. Ex. 21 reappears in Yallaya’s comm, on A, ii, 8. It occurs
also in Prthtidaka’s comm. on BrSpSi, xii. 28.

--- Page 414 ---
 

EXAMPLES OF BHASKARA 293

22. (In a trapezium) the altitude is stated to be 12 (units),
the base 19 (units) and the face 5 (units). The lateral sides of that
are given to be 10 (units) as severally increased by 5 and 3 (units), I
want to know the area and the junction-lines correctly.’

, [Page 66, Ex. 5]

14. Area of a Rectangle etc.

23. (Of three rectangles) the breadths are 8,5 and 10 (units) ;
and the lengths of these are 16, 12 and 14 (units), (respectively). What
are the areas of the rectangles ? [Page 67, Ex. 1]

24. Say how verification will be made inthe case of all the
areas of triangles, quadrilaterals and circles which have been determi-
ned by theoretical calculation.” [Page 68, Ex. 2]

25, (In a trapezium) one face (ie., side) is seen to be 11 (units),
the opposite (parallel) face is stated to be 9 (units), and the: length
(= distance) (between them) is 20 (units). What, O mathematician, is
the area of that figure ?° [Page 69, Ex. 3]

15. Area of a drum-shaped figure

26. The two (parallel) faces of (a figure resembling) a panava
(a drum-shaped musical instrument) are each 8 (units), the central width
is 2 (units), and the length (between the faces) is 16 (units). Say what
is the area of this figure resembling a panava [Page 70, Ex. 4]

The figure contemplated is a double trapezium obtained by
placing two equal trapeziums in juxtaposition in such a way that the
smaller of the two parallel sides of the trapeziums forms the central

 

1. Thisis an example of a trapezium in which the lateral sides
are unequal. In sucha trapezium, the area and the junction-lines
are determined if, besides the sides, the altitude is also known.

2. According to Bhaskara I, the first half of A, ii. 9 relates to
the verification of areas of rectilinear figures. What is meant is that
the given figure should be deformed into a rectangle and then the area
should be obtained by multiplying the length of the rectangle by its
breadth. A rectangle is chosen because its area is well known. In
this connection, Bhaskara I has quoted a passage from some unknown
mathematical work.

_ 3,4. Exs. 25 and 26 reappear in Raghunatha-raja’s comm. on
A, ii. 9.

--- Page 415 ---
“994 APPENDIX I

width of the double trapezium. The formula used by Bhaskara I for
the area of this figures is

area=y (44° +e) xl

‘where a, b are lengths of the parallel faces, / the distance between them
and c the central width.

 

‘16. Area of a figure resembling the elephant’s tusk
27. The width (at the base) is stated to be 5 (units), the belly
(i.e., inner curved side) is 9 (units), and the back (i.e., outer curved
side) is 15 (units). Say, what is ‘the area of this (figure resembling the)
tusk of an elephant.? [Page 70, Ex. 5]

The figure envisaged is a curvilinear triangle, bounded by a
straight base and two curved sides curved in the sarne direction. The
formula used by Bhaskara I for the area of such a figure is :

a be

area=> — K ———.
€ 2 x 2 3
where a is the base and b, c the curved sides.

17, Area of a Circle

28. Calculate, O friend, according to the Ganita (of Aryabhata),
the nearest approximations to the areas of the circles whose diameters
are 2, 4, 7 and 8, respectively. [Page 75, Ex. 1]

18. Diameter of a Circle from circumference

29. Calculate and tell me the diameters of the circles whose
peripheries are 3299 minus 8/25 and 21600, respectively.

[Page 76, Ex. 2]

19. Local latitude from midday shadow of a gnomon

30. When, at an equinox, the Sun is onthe meridian, the shadow
of a gnomon, divided into 12 units, on level ground is seen to be 5, 9,
and 33 (units, at three different places), (Find the latitudes of those
places). [Page 89, Ex, 1]

31. The shadow of the gnomon of 15 afgulas at midday on an

equinox is (seen to be) 6 plus } angulas. Give out the Rsines of the
latitude and the co-latitude. [Page 90, Ex. 2]

 

 

 

1, Ex. 27 reappears in Raghunatha-raja’s comm. on A, ii. 9,

--- Page 416 ---
EXAMPLES OF BHASKARA 298

32.. Say what is the distance of the Sun whose rays are
(profusely) spread all around, from the zenith, when the shadow of
gnomon of 30 (afgulas) is observed to be 16 (angulas).

[Page 90, Ex. 3]

20. Shadow of a gnomon due to a lamp-post

33. Tell (me the length of ) the shadow of the gnomon situated
at a distance of 80 (angulas) from the foot of a lamp-post of height
72 (angulas); and also that of another gnomon situated at a distance
20 (angulas) froma lamp-post of height 30 (engulas).”

[Page 91, Ex, 1]

34. Say what is the distance of the gnomon of 12 (angulas),
from the foot of the lamp-post of height 72 angulas if the shadow
(cast by the gnomon) is 16 (angulas).* [Page 92, Ex, 2]

35. The shadow of a gnomon, situated at a distance of 50
angulas) from the foot of a lamp-post, is 10 (angulas). Say what is
the height of the lamp.* [Page 92, Ex, 3]

36. (The lengths of ) the shadows of two equal gnomons (of 12
(angulas) are seen to be 10 and 16 (angulas), respectively; the distance
between the shadow-tips is seen to be 30 (afgulas). Give out the
upright and the base for each (gnomon),® [Page 94, Ex. 1]

The ‘base’ means ‘the height of the lamp-post’ and the ‘upright’
means ‘the distance of the shadow-tip from the foot of the lamp-post’.
The two gnomons are assumed to be in the same direction as seen
from the lamp-post.

———

 

1, By saying that the rays of the Sun are profusely spread it is
meant that it is midday.

2, Ex. 33 reappears in the commentaries of Stryadeya, Yallaya
and Raghunatha-raja on A, ii. 15.

3. Ex. 34 reappears in the commentaries of Yallaya and
Raghunitha-raja on A, ii, 15.

_ 4. Ex. 35 reappears in the commentary of Raghunatha-raja on.
A, ii. 16.

5. Ex. 36 reappears in the commentaries of Somesvara, Surya-
deva, Yallaya and Raghunatha-raja on A, ii. 16,

--- Page 417 ---
96 APPENDIX I

37. (The lengths of ) the shadows of two equal gnomons (of 12
angulas) ate stated to be 5 and 7 (angulas), respectively. The distance
between the shadow-ends is observed to be 8 (angulas). Give out the
base and the upright. [Page 94, Ex. 2]

21. The so-called Pythagoras theorem

38. Give out the hyotenuses (for three right-angled triangles)
where the bases and the uprights are 3 and 4, 6 and 8, and 12 and 9
(units), respectively. [Page 96, Ex. 1]

22. A property of the Circle

The property contemplated here in this : “If the diameter ABC
and the chord LBM of a circle intersect at right angles, then
LB’=ABX BC, AB and BC being called the arrows and LB
the Rsine.”

39. In acircle of diameter 10 (units), the arrows (i.e., segments
of a diameter) are seen by me to be 2 and 8 (units); in the same circle,
another set of arrows is 9 and 1 (units). Tell (me) the corresponding
Rsines." [Page 97, Ex. 1]

23. Hawk.and-rat problems
40. A hawk is sitting on the top of a rampart whose height is
12 cubits. The hawk sees a rat at a distance of 24 cubits away from
the foot of the rampart ; the rat, too, sees the hawk, Thereupon the
rat, out of fear for the hawk, hastens to its own dwelling situated at
(the foot of) the rampart but is killed. in between by the hawk which
flew along a hypotenuse (i.e., along an oblique path). 1 want to know
the distance traversed by the rat and also the (horizontal) motion
of the hawk, (the speeds of the two being the same).*
[Pages 98-99, Ex. 2]
41, A hawk is sitting on a pole whose height is 18 (cubits).
A rat, which has gone out of its dwelling (at the foot of the pole) to
a distance of 81 (cubits), while returning towards its dwelling, afraid
of the hawk, is killed by the cruel (bird) on the way. Say how far has

 

 

 

1, Ex. 39 reappears in the commentaries of Stryadeva, Yallaya
and Raghunatha-raja on A, ii. 17.

2. Ex. 40 reappears in Raghunatha-raja’s comm. on A, ii. 17.
Similar is the cat and mouse problem which occurs in Prthadaka’s
comm. on BrSpSi, xii. 41.

--- Page 418 ---
EXAMPLES OF BHASKARA 997

it gone towards its hole, and also the (horizontal) motion of the
hawk, (the speeds of the rat and the hawk being the same).*
[Page 99, Ex, 3]
The above two examples (Exs. 40 and 41) have been called the
‘hawk-and-rat problems’. Bhaskara I ascribes such problems to
previous writers, He writes: “At this very place they narrate the
hawk and rat problems,”

The Hindu method for solving such problems has been explained
by Bhaskara I in detail, Followmg that method, Ex. 41 may be
solved as follows :

Draw a circle with centre at O, Let ABOC be the horizontal
diameter and LBM a vertical chord intersecting the diameter at B.
Imagine that BL is the pole and BC the track of the rat. The hawk
is sitting at Z and the rat isat C. They see each other. The rat
then runs to its hole at B but is killed by the hawk at O, the distance
traversed by the hawk (i.e, ZO) and by the rat (ée, CO) being
the same.

It is given that LB=z=18 cubits, and BC=81 cubits. Since
LB? =ABx BC, therefore AB=4 cubits.

BO =1(BC —AB)=38} cubits and CO=4 (BC+ AB)=423
cubits. Hence the distance traversed by the rat is 424 cubits and the
horizontal motion of the hawk is 381 cubits.

It is interesting to note that Yallaya and Raghunatha-raja have
prescribed the same method for solving the hawk-and-rat problems
as described above The peacock-and-serpent problems given by
Bhaskara Il, Yallaya and Raghunatha-raja are similar to the hawk-
and-rat problems,

24. Bamboo problems

42. A bamboo of height 18 (cubits) is felled by the wind.
It falls at a distance of 6 (cubits) from the root, thus forming a
(right-angled) triangle. Where is the break 7° (Page 99, Ex. 4]

 

 

1. Ex. 41 reappears in Yallaya’s comm. on A, ii. 17.

2. Ex. 42 reappears in Prthidaka’s comm. on BrSpSi, xii. 41
and in Raghunatha-raja’s comm. on A, ii; 17.

Wo We 3a

--- Page 419 ---
298 APPENDIX I

This example is found to occur in Prthtdaka’s commentary
on the Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta’ of Brahmagupta. His method of
solution is the same as used by Bhaskara I.” Similar problems are
also found to occurin the Ganita-sara-sangraha’ of Mahavira, the
Lilavati? and Bijaganita’ of Bhaskara {I, and the Ganita-kaumudi®
of Narayana.

43. A bamboo of 16 cubits is felled by the wind ; it falls at
a distance of 8 (cubits) from its root. Say where has it been broken
by the wind.’ [Page 100, Ex. 5]

In the case of the bamboo problems like Exs. 42 and 43, BC
(in the figure of Ex. 41) is taken to represent the bamboo which
breaks at O and reaches the ground (BZ) at ZL. To find the height
of the break, we have to obtain the length BO. As before,
BO =14(BC-——AB) where AB=LB*|BC.

25. Lotus problems

44. A full-blown lotus of 8 angulas is seen (just) above the
water. Being carried away by the wind it just submerges at a
distance of one cubit (24 angulas). Quickly say the height of the
lotus plant and the depth of the water.® [Page 101, Ex. 6]

45. A lotus flower of 6 angulas just dips (into the water)
when it advances through a distance of 2 cubits. I want to know

the height of the lotus plant and the depth of the water.°
[Page 101, Ex, 7]

1. xii. 41.

2, See B. Datta, “On the supposed indebtedness of Brahma-
gupta to Chiu-chang Suan-shu”, Bull. Cal. Math. Soc., vol, xxii, p. 41.

3. vii. 1914-1922.

4, See Lilavati, (Anandasrama Sanskrit Series), p. 141.

5. See Bijagayita, ed. by Sudhakara Dvivedi and Muralidhara
Jha, Banaras, (1927), p. 57.

6, Ksetra-vyavahdra, Ex. 26.

7. This example reappears in Someévara’s comm, on A,
ii, 17.

8. Ex. 44 reappears in Prthtdaka’s comm. on BrSpSi, xii. 41,
and in the commentaries of Some$vara, Yallaya and Raghunatha-raja
on A, ii. 17. .

9. Similar examples occur in the works of Bhaskara I]

--- Page 420 ---
EX AMPLES CF BHASKARA 299

Consider a circle with centre at O. Let ABOC be its vertical
diameter and LBM a horizontal chord intersecting the vertical
diameter at B.

In the case of the lotus problems, the horizontal diameter of
the circle is supposed to denote the mud-level ; the chord LBM the
water-level ; O is supposed to be the root of the lotus plant, OB the
lotus stalk, AB the lotus flower, and Z and M the points where the
lotus flower just dips into the water, Then OA (e., height of lotus
plant)=}(BC-++AB), where BC=LB"/AB; and OB G. e., depth
of water) =1(BC—AB).

26. Crane-and-Fish problems

46. There is a reservoir of water of dimensions 6x12. At
the east-north corner thereof there is a fish ; and at the west-north
corner there is a crane. For fear of him (ée., of the crane) the fish,
crossing the reservoir, hurriedly went towards the south in an oblique
direction but was killed by the crane who came along the sides of
the reservoir. Give out the distances travelled by them (assuming
that their speeds are the same). [Page 102, Ex. 8]

47, There is a reservoir of water of dimensions 12X10. At
the east-south corner there isa crane and at the east-north corner,
there is a fish. (The crane walks along the sides of the reservoir
and the fish swims obliquely). Say, on reaching which point of the
western side of the reservoir is the fish killed by the crane.”

[Page 103, Ex. 9]

Following the method of Bhaskara I, first of the above two
examples (ée., Ex. 46) may be solved as follows :

 

 

(L, Ex. 155, p. 145; BBi, Ex. 112) and Narayana (GK, ksetra-vyavahara,
Ex. 28).
Problems similar to Exs. 44 and 45 are reported to occur in
a Chinese work called Chiu-chang Suan-shu, but the Chinese solution
to those problems is quite different from that of Bhaskara I. The
Hindu solution is based on the property of right-angled triangle which
was known in India as early as the Vedic period.

1. Ex. 46 reappears in the comm. of Ragunatha-raja on A,
ii, 17 (c-d). A similar example occurs in the comm. of Yallaya also.

2. Ex. 47 reappears in Raghunatha-raja’s comm. on A, ii.
17 (¢-d),

--- Page 421 ---
300 APPENDIX I

Let ZLBQP be the reservoir in which BO=LP=12, and
LB=PQ=6. Also suppose that LB is the east side, PO the west
side, LP the north side, and BO the southside of the reservoir,
Initially the fish isat Zand the craneat P. After some time the
fish swimming along LO reaches O, a point in BQ. In the same
time, the crane, walking along PQ and then along QB, also reaches
O and kills the fish. The speeds of the fish and the crane being the
same LO=PQ+Q0. Let OC (along OQ produced) be equal to OL.
Then the circle drawn with O as centre and OL as radius must pass
through C, and we have

BC= BO+ PO=12+6=18.
If CB produced intersects the circle at 4, then
AB= LB*/BC = 36/18 ==2.

Hence AC=4B+ BC=20 giving OL==10. Therefore the
distances traversed by the fish and the crane are each equal to 10.

Proceeding as above, it can be shown that the point required
in Ex, 47 divides the western side of the reservoir in the ratio
8x5: 334.

An example similar to the above two occurs in the Ganita-
kaumudi of Narayana. See Ksetra-vyavahara, pp. 38-39, Ex. 29-31.

27. Arrows of intercepted arcs of the Moon and the Shadow

48. When 8 out of 32 of (the diameter of) the Moon are
eclipsed by the Shadow of diameter 80, I want to know then what are
the arrows of (the intercepted arcs of ) the Shadow and the full Moon.!

[Page 104, Ex. 1]
28. Middle term and the Sum of a series in A.P.

49. In a series (in A.P.) the first term is seen to be 2 ; the
common difference is stated to be 3 ; and the number of terms is
Stated to be 5. Tell (me) the middle term and the sum of the series

[Page 105, Ex. 1]

 

1, Ex. 48 reappears in Mah@vira’s Ganita-sara-sangraha. See
GSS, vii. 2324. It reappears also in Somesvara’s comm, on A, ti. 18.
A similar example occurs also in the commentary of Stiryadeva.

2. Ex. 49 and 51, below, reappear in the commentaries of
Suryadeva, Yallaya, and Raghunatha-raja on 4, ii. 19, Ex. 49

--- Page 422 ---
EXAMPLES OF BHASKARA 301

50. Ina series (in A.P.) in which the first term is 8, the
common difference is stated to be 5 and the numbers of terms is seen
to be 18, Give out the middle term and the sum of the series.

[Page 106, Ex. 2]
29. Desired term of a series in A.P.

51. (Ina series in A P.) in which the common difference is
1] and the first term 7, the number of terms is 25. Quickly say the
ultimate and penultimate terms of that series and also say what is the
twentieth term. [Page 106, Ex. 3]

30. Partial sums ofa series in A.P.

52. In the month of Kartika a certain king daily gives away
some money (in charity) starting with 2 on the first day (of the month)
and increasing that by 3 per day, Fifteen days having passed, there
arrived a Brahmana well-versed in the Vedas. The amount for the
next ten days was given to him ; that for the (remaining) five days (of
the month), to someone else. Say what do the last two persons get.

[Page 106, Ex. 4]

53. (In a series in A.P.) in which the first term is 15, the
common difference is stated to be 18 and the number of terms 30.
Quickly calculate the sum of the ten middle terms (of that series).

[Page 107, Ex. 5]

31. Sum ofa series in A.P., given first term, last term, and number
of terms

54. (Of 11 conch-shells which are arranged in the increasing
order of their prices which are in A P.) the first conch-shell is acquired
for 5 and the last for 95. Say what is the price of all the 11 conch-
shells. [Page 107, Ex. 6]

55. (In an arithmetic series) the first term is stated to be 1.
The last term is declared by the learned to be 100; the same is also
stated to be number of terms. What is the sum of all the terms
(Of that series) ? (Page 108, Ex. 7]

 

reappears also in Somesvara’s comm. on A, ii. 19 and in Prthudaka’s
comm. on &rSpSi, xii. 17.

1. Ex. 54 reappears in Yallaya’s comm. on 4, ii. 19. A
similar example on conch-shells occurs in Prthudaka’s comm. on
BrSpSi, xii. 17,

--- Page 423 ---
302 APPENDIX I

32. Number of terms of a series in A.P., given first term, common
difference, and sum of the series

56. Ina series (in A.P.) the first term is stated to be 5;
the common difference is 7 and the sum 95. Say what is the number
of terms thereof. [Page 108, Ex. 1]

57. (In an arithmetic series) in which the common difference
and the first term are 9 and 8, respectively, the sum is stated to be
583. Tell (me) the number of terms. [Page 109, Ex. 2]

33. On the sum of the series 1+ (142) +(14+2+43)+.,, ...

58. There are (three pyramidal) piles (of balls) having res-
pectively 5, 8 and 14 layers which are triangular. Tell me the
number of units (balls) (in each of them).? [Page 109, Ex. 1]

In the topmost layer of the pyramidal piles, there is 1 ball;
in the second layer from the top, there are 14-2==3 balls; in the
third layer, there are 1+2-+3=6 balls ; in the fourth layer, there

are 14+2+3-+44=10 balls; and soon. Every layer is in the form
of a triangle.

The number of balls in the first pile having five layers

=14 (14+ 24+(1 +2434... 4 (142434445)

se OKO or 35.

Similarly, the number of balls in the other two piles are 120
and 560, respectively.

34, Sum of the series 12+224-3%+...4n?

59. There are (three pyramidal) piles on square bases having
7, 8 and 17 layers which are also squares. Say the number of units
therein (é e., the number of bricks, of unit size used in each of them).

[Page 111, Ex. 1]
1. This example reappears in Some$vara’s comm.

2. Ex. 58 reappears in the commentaries of Stiryadeva,
Yallaya and Raghunatha-raja on A, ii. 21. Also see GSS, Misraka-
vyavahara, Ex. 331}.

3. Ex. 59 reappears in Yallaya’s comm. on 4, ii. 22.

--- Page 424 ---
EXAMPLES OF BHASKARA 303

In the topmost layer there is one brick, in the next there are
four, in the next nine, and so on. The number of bricks used in the
three piles are 140, 204 and 1785, respectively.

35. Sum of the series 15 +2°+3°+ ..+n'

60. There are (three pyramidal) piles having 5, 4 and 9
cuboidal layers. They are constructed of cuboidal bricks (of unit
dimensions) with one brick in the topmost layer. (Find the number
of bricks used in each of them).’ [Page 111, Ex. 2]

There is 1? brick in the topmost laycr, 2° bricks in the next
layer, 3° bricks in the next, and so on. The number of bricks in the
three piles are 225, 100 and 2025, respectively.

36. Product of two given numbers by the formula
xy=3 [eto 7]
61. What are the products of 5 and 4, of 7 and 9, and of
8 and 10 2? Quickly say, separately. [Page 112, Ex. 1]

37. Two numbers whose difference and product are known

62. The product (of two numbers) is correctly seen to be 8 ;

their difference is 2. (Of two other numbers) the product being 18,
the difference is 7. Tell (me) the numbers multiplied in the two cases.
[Page 113, Ex. 1]

38. Interest
63. Ido not know the (monthly) interest on 100, but I do
know that the (monthly) interest on 100 plus interest on that interest

accruing in 4 months is 6. Give out the monthly interest on 100.
[Page 114, Ex. 1]

64, The monthly interest on 25 (ra@pas) is not known. But
the monthly interest on 25 rfpas lent out elesewhere at the same
rate (of interest) is seen to amouat to 3 minus } rapas in 5 months.
I want to know the monthly interest on 25 (rapas) as also the

interest for 5 months on the interest of 25 (rapas). [Page 115, Ex. 2]

 

 

1. Ex. 60 reappears in Yallaya’s comm. on A, ii. 22.

2, Ex, 63 reappears in the commentaries on A, ii. 25 of
Yallaya and Raghunatha-raja,

--- Page 425 ---
404 APPENDIX t

65. The monthly interest on 100 (rapas) is not known, but
the interest on 100 (72pas) lent out elsewhere (at the same rate of
interest) is seen to amount with interest thereon to 15 rapas in
5 months. I want to know— what is the monthly interest on 100
(rapas) as also what is the interest that accrues in 5 months on the
interest of 100 (ripas) ? [Page 115, Ex. 3]
39. Rule of Three

66 5 palas of sandalwood are purchased by me for 9
ripakas. How much of sandlewood will, then, be purchased for one
rapaka ? , [Page 117, Ex. 1]

67. If one bhara (=2000 Palas) of ginger is sold for
10 plus § (rupakas), tell me quickly the price of 100 plus } palas
of ginger. [Page 117, Ex. 2]

68. 1 palas of musk are to be had for 8 plus £ (r@pakas).
Let Krtavirya find out how much of musk will be had for 1 plus zt
(rupakas).? [Page 118, Ex. 3]

69. A serpent of 20 cubits in length enters into a hole,
moving forward at the rate of 3of an angula per muharia® and
backward at the rate of } of an angula (per muhurta): in how many
days does he get into the hole completely ?4 [Page 118, Ex. 4]
40. Proportion and Partnership

70. (Out of 11 cattle) 8 are tamed and 3 to be tamed —so are
the cattle described. Out of 1001 cattle, then, how many are tamed
and how many to be tamed ?* [Page 118, Ex. 5]

re

 

1, Ex. 66 reappears in Yallaya’s comm. on A, ii, 26-27 (a-b),

2. Ex, 68 reappears in Yallaya’s comm. on A, ii, 26-27 (a-b).
3. | muhurta=48 minutes,

4. Ex. 69 reappears in the commentaries of Yallaya and
Raghunatha-raja on, A, ii. 26, Raghunatha-raja has, however, put
the example in a slightly different form. A similar example is found
to occur in the Bakhshali Manuscript. Cf. G.R. Kaye, Bakhshali
Manuscript, Arch. Survey of India, New Imperial Series, vol. XLII,
Parts I and II, -1927, Ex. 99, p. 51.

5. Exs. 70 and 71 reappear in the commentaries of Yallaya
and Raghunatha-raja_on A, ii. 26. Ex, 70 reappears also in Someé-
vara’s comm.

--- Page 426 ---
EXAMPLES OF BHASKARA 305

71. Five merchants collaborate (in a business) ; the capitals
invested by them are (in the ratio of) 1 and the same number
increasing successively by one (i.e,, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 respectively), The
profit that accrued (on the whole capital) amounts to 1000. Say
what should be given to whom. [Page 119, Ex. 6]

72. The combined profit of three merchants whose invest-
ments are in the ratio of 4, 4 and % respectively, amounts to 70 minus
1. What is whose profit (individually) 7" [Page 119, Ex, 7]

41. Rule of Five

73, Given that 100 increases by 5 in a month, say, if you
are versed in (Arya)bhata’s Ganita, by how much will 20 increase in
6 months.” [Page 119, Ex. 8]

74. 100 invested for 5 months increases by 5; by how
much will 25 invested for 5 months increase ? [Page 120, Ex. 9]

75. If 44 rupakas be the increase (interest) on 100 (rapakas)
for 3} months, what will be the increase on 50 rapakas for 10
months 2 [Page 120, Ex. 10]

76. A sum of 20 plus } (rzpakas) increase by 1 plus 4
ripakas in 1 plus } months. (Say) after carefully understanding ‘the
method of elimination of divisors’ from the aphorism of the (Arya)-
bhata-tantra, what will be the increase of 7 minus + (rapakas) in 6
plus 1/10 months.’ [Page 121, Ex. 11]

42. Rule of Seven

71. If 9 kuduvas of pure parched and flattened rice are
obtained daily for an elephant whose height is 7 (cubits), periphery 30
(cubits), and length 9 (cubits),‘ say how much of parched and flattened

 

1. Ex. 72 reappears in Yallaya’s comm. on A, ii. 26.

2. Ex. 73 reappears in the commentaries of Yallaya and
Raghunstha-raja on A, ii, 26.

3. Ex. 75 reappears in Yallaya’s comm. on 4, ii. 26.

4. In Kautilya’s Arthasastra, an elephant whose height is
7 cubits, length 9 cubits, breadth 10 cubits and age 40 years is
described as the best.

Wao Alo BR

--- Page 427 ---
306 APPENDIX I

rice will (have to) be obtained for an elephant whose height is 5
(cubits), length 7 (cubits), and periphery 28 (cubits).
. [Page 121, Ex. 12]

78. If two and a half kuduvas of kidney beans (masa) are
obtained for an excellent elephant whose height is 4 cubits, length 6
(cubits), and breadth 5 (cubits), how much should be obtained for
an elephant whose height is 3 (cubits), length 5 (cubits), and breadth
41 (cubits) 2° [Page 121, Ex. 13]

43, Inverse Proportion

79. When one palais equivalent to 5 suvarnas, a certain
quantity of gold weighs 16 palas. What will the same gold weigh
when one pala is equivalent to 4 suvarnas 2° [Page 122, Ex, 14]

80. 8 baskets are seen (to contain the whole grain) when
‘each (basket) contains 14 prasritis (of grain); say how many baskets
would be (required) when each (basket) can contain 8 prasrtis (of grain)
(only).* [Page 122, Ex. 15]

44. Simplification of Fractions

81, 1/2, 1/6, 1/12 and 1/4 being respectively added together
(two at a time), say what is the aggregate.® [Page 123, Ex. 1]

 

1. Exs. 76 and 77 reappear in the commentaries of Yallaya
and Raghunatha-raja on A, ii, 26.

2. After solving this example, Bhaskara I adds: “Similarly,
(the rules of Aryabhata I) should be applied to problems involving
nine quantities or more.” This shows that the so-called rules of
nine and eleven, etc. were well known in the time of Bhaskara I.

3. Ex. 79 reappears in Yallaya’s comm. on A, ii. 26.

4. Prasrti is a measure of grain, equivalent to one handful.
According to Anuyogadvara-sttra, 2 prasttis are equivalent to 1 setika.
For setika, see above Introduction, p. Ixxx.

5. Ex. 80 reappears in Yallaya’s comm. on A, ii. 26.

6. Ex. 81, in different words, is found to occur in
Prthidaka’s comm. on BrSpSi, xii. 8.

--- Page 428 ---
EXAMPLES OF BHASKARA 307

82, What are the sums of 1/2, 1/6 and 1/3, and of 1/2, 1/6,
1/12, 1/20 and 1/5 2! [Page 123, Ex. 2]

83. Calculate, O mathematicians, what the following sums
amount to (when added together) : 1/2 minus 1/6 ; 1/5 minus 1/7 ;
and 1/3 minus 1/4. [Page 123, Ex. 3]

45. Method of Inversion

84. A-number is multiplied by 2; then increased by 1 ;
then divided by 5; then multiplied by 3; then diminished by 2 ; and
then divided by 7: the result (thus obtained) is 1. Say what is the
initial number.” {Page 124, Ex. 1]

85. What is that number which when multiplied by 3, then
diminished by 1, then halved, then increased by 2, then divided by 3
and finally diminished by 2, yields 1 ? [Page 125, Ex. 2]

46. Simultaneous Linear Equations

86. Ina forest there are (four) herds of elephants consisting
(severally) of elephants in rut, elephants not in rut, female elephants,
and young elephants. The sums of the elephants in the four herds
excluding one (herd), in turn, are known to be 30, 36, 49 and 50
(respectively). Correctly state the total number of elephants and also
the number in each herd separately.* [Page 126, Ex. 1]

87. The sums of the numbers of elephants, horses, goats,
asses, camels, mules and cows excluding one of those animals at a
time, are respectively 28, and the same number (ie., 28) successively
diminished by 1, the last number (thus obtained) being further dimi-

 

1. This example reappears is SomeSvara’s comm. on A,
ii. 27.

2. Ex. 84 reappears in the commentaries of Yallaya and
Raghunatha-raja on A, ii. 28.

3. Ex. 86 reappears in the commentaries of Stryadeva and
Raghunatha-raja on A, ii. 29. It requires the solution of the
simultaneous equations : x» x3+x,=30, xg-b¥_-+% = 36, X41 +X,
= 49, x, +%,-+%3=50, where x1, %2, ¥; and x, denote the numbers of
animals in the four herds. See B, Datta and A.N. Singh, History of
Hindu Mathematics, Part H, pp. 47 &

--- Page 429 ---
308 APPENDIX I

nished by 1. If you have read the whole of the (chapter on) Ganita
composed by Aryabhata from a teacher, correctly state the total
number of the animals and also the numbers of the different animals
separately,! [Page 126, Ex. 2]

47. Simple Equations
88. (There are two merchants.) With the first merchant are
seen by me 7 strong horses bearing auspicious marks and money
in hand amounting to 100 (r#pakas) ; with the second (merchant)
there are 9 horses and money amounting to 80 (rupakas). If the two
merchants be equally rich and the price of each horse be the same,
tell (me) the.price of one horse and also the equal wealth (with them)?
[Page 127, Ex. 1]

89. A certain person has 8 palas of saffron and money
amounting to 90 rapakas; another person possesses 12 palas of saffron
and 30 rzpakas ; (and the two persons are equally rich). If the two
persons have bought the saffron at the same rate per pala, I want
to know the price of one pala (of saffron) and also the equal wealth
with the two. [Page 127-28, Ex. 2]

90. 7 yavattavat-+7 rupaka=2 yavattavat+-12 ripaka. What
is the value of 1 yavattavat ? [Page 128, Ex. 3]

Ol. 9 gulik@+ 7 rRpaka=3 gulik@-+13 ripaka. What is the
price of 1 gulika ? [Page 128, Ex. 4]

92. 9 gulika—24 ripaka==2 gulika+-18 rapaka. Say what
the price of 1 gulika is. [Page 128, Ex. 5]
48. Meeting of two travellers

93. One (man) goes from Valabhi at the speed of 14 yojanas
a day ; another (man) comes (along the same route) from Harukaccha
at the speed of 1} yojanas a day. The distance between the two

 

1. If x, Xe, Xe, X4 Xs, Xe and x, are the numbers of the
various animals and s their sum, then we have to solve the simul-
taneous equations : s—x ,==28, 5--X,g==27, 5—x,=26, s—x,=25,
S—x, = 24, s—x,=23, s—x,= 21,

° 2. Similar examples occur in Raghunatha-raja’s comm. on
A, ii. 30.

--- Page 430 ---
EXAMPLES OF BHASKARA 309

(places) is known to be 18 yojanas. Say, O mathematician, after how
much time (since start) will they meet each other.! [Page 131, Ex. 1]

94. One man goes from Valabhi to the Ganges at the speed
of 1} yojanas a day, and at the same time another man proceeds
from Sivabhagapura at the speed of 2/3 yojanas a day. The distance
between the two (places) has been stated by the learned to be 24
yojanas. If they travel along the same route, after how much time

will they meet (each other) ? [Page 131, Ex. 2]

49. Indeterminate equations of the first degree
(a) Residual pulveriser (sagra-kuttakara)
95. A number leaves 1 as the remainder when divided by
5, and 2 (as the remainder) when divided by 7. Calculate what that
number is. [Page 133, Ex. 1]

Solution. Let the desired number be N. Then N=5x-+-1=
Ty+2, whence (7y+1)/5=x. Solving this, we get x==3, y==2 as
the least integral solution. Therefore N=16. Since this number is
satisfied by two divisors, it is called dvyagra.

96. A number yields 5 as the remainder when divided by 12,
and the same number is again seen by me to yield 7 as the remainder
when divided by 31. What is that number ?° [Page 133, Ex. 2]

97. Calculate what is that number which is said to yield 5
as the remainder when divided by 8, 4 when divided by 9, and 1 when
divided by 7. [Page 134, Ex. 3]

Solution. Let the desired number be N. Then N=8x+5=
Oy+4=72z4+1. We first solve N=8x-+5=9y+4 or (Qy—I)/8=x.
This gives x-=1-+9/, y= 1482 as the general solution, so that
N=72t+13. Now we solve N=72t+13=72z-+1 or (72t-+-12)/7=2
or (2t-+-5)/7=2'. This gives f=1, as the least integral value of 7,

 

1, If ¢ denotes the required time in days, then 14¢-+1}:—18,
giving t= 6°, days.
2. If t denotes the required time in days, then 1}/—§1=24,
giving t==28$ days.
_ Exs. 93 and 94 reappear in Raghun@tha-raja’s comm. on
A, ii. 31.
3. Answer 317.

--- Page 431 ---
310 APPENDIX 1f

Therefore N=85. Since this number is satisfied by three divisors,
it is called tryagra.

98. Quickly say, O mathematician, what is that number
which when divided by the numbers beginning with 2 and ending in
6 (in each case) leaves 1 as the temainder, and is exactly divisible
by 7.4 [Page 134, Ex. 4]

(b) Non-residual pulveriser (niragra.kuttakara)

99. 8 is multiplied by some number and the product is
increased by 6 and that sum is then divided by 13. If the division
be exact, what is the (unknown) multiplier and what is the resulting
quotient ? [Page 135, Ex. 5]

Solution. Let the multiplier be x and the quotient y, Then
we have to solve the equation (Sx -+6)/13=y. Solving this, we get
x=9, y=6.

100. 11 is multiplied by a certain number, the product is
diminished by 3, and the difference {thus obtained) being divided by
23 is (found to be) exactly divisible. Tell me the quotient and the
multiplier.” [Page 136, Ex. 6]

Exs, 95 to 98 are illustrations of the residual pulveriser (sagra-
kuttaka@ra) and Ex. 99 and 100 are illustrations of the non-residual
pulveriser (niragra-kuttakdra). Classification of the pulveriser
(kuttakara) into the residual (sdgra) and non-residual (niragra) varieties
is probably due to Bhaskara I. Such classification is not found to
occur in the Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta of Brahmagupta who was a
contemporary of Bhaskara I. Bhaskara’I has shown that Aryabhata
T’s rule (A, ii. 32-33) is applicable to both the residual and non-
residual pulverisers.

Examples like 95 to 98 are now known as ‘the Chinese
problems of remainders’, One such example occurs in the Chinese
arithmetical work, the Sun-Tsu Suar-ching, written about the last
quarter of the first century A.D, Sun Tst, the author of the work,
was able to get only a single solution of his problem. A general

 

 

1. Answer 301. This example reappears in the commentaries
of Suryadeva and Raghunatha-raja on 4, ii. 32-33,
2. Answer 8, 17,

--- Page 432 ---
EXAMPLES OF BHASKARA 311

solution of the indeterminate equation of the first degree was not
known in China even in the sixth and seventh centuries. “By that
time, an indeterminate problem was attacked by three successive
Chinese mathematicians of note and they obtained only three tentative
solutions.» The Chinese indeterminate analysis, called fai-yen-shy
or f’ai-yen-ch' iu-i-shu (‘great extension method of finding unity’) was
materially developed by the Buddhist priest I-tsing in 727 A.D. and
later on by Ch’in Chiu-shao in 1247 A.D2 Now, I-tsing was a
Sanskrit scholar. He came to India in 673 A.D. and learnt, amongst
various other things, the ingenious device of solving astronomical
problems with the help of indeterminate analysis which seems to have
been a favourite subject of study with the learned Hindu scholars of
the time. On return to his native land, I-tsing availed himself of
this helpful device in composing a new calendrical system for the
Chinese and for so doing he was once accused of too much Hindu
bias by the native Chinese calendar-makers. Professor Mikami has
pointed out that the Chinese interest in indeterminate analysis grew
after their contact with the Hindu culture and he seems to be of the
further opinion that it did so, indeed, under the influence of the latter?
It is, however, noteworthy that the interest of the Chinese in indetermi-
nate analysis always remained confined amongst the astronomers,’’’8

50. Astronomical examples on the Pulveriser

101. The mean (position) of the Sun has been observed by
me at sunrise to be in the sign Leo in the middle of the ndvamamia

 

 

1. Young Pao, vol. xiv (1913), p. 203.

2. Cf Yoshio Mikami, The development of mathematics in
China and Japan, Leipzig, 1913, pp. 58, 63 et seq. Also of, N.K.
Majumdar, ‘On Chinese indeterminate analysis,’ Bull, Calcutta Math,
Soc., vol. 5, pp. 9-11.

3. Cf. Mikami, J.c., p. 58.

4. Cf. Mikami, /.c., p. 65. ;

5. Cf. B. Datta, ‘The Hindu contributions to mathematics —

Presidential Address at the Annual Meeting of the Association, Bull,
Math, Association, University of Allahabad, vol. II, 1928-29, pp. 9-10.

6. For a detailed discussion of the early Hindu theory of the
planetary pulveriser, see K.S. Shukla, Laghu-Bhaskariya (pp. 103-14)
and the Mahd@-Bhaskariya (pp. 29-46, 219-24),

--- Page 433 ---
$12 APPENDIX I

Sagittarius... Calculate the ahargana (i. e,, the number of days
elapsed since the beginning of Kaliyuga when the longitude of the
planets was zero) according to the (Arya)bhata-Sastra, and also the
revolutions performed by the Sun since the beginning of Kaliyuga.?

[Page 137, Ex. 7]

Mean fongitude of the Sun—=4 signs 28°20’—8900'. Multi-
plying 8900 by 210389 (i. e., abraded civil days) and dividing the
product by 21600 (i.e., minutes in a revolution), we get 86688. This
is the residue of the revolution, Since the Sun’s abraded revolution-
number : abraded civil days in a yuga :: 576: 210389, we have
to solve the equation :

576x—-86688
310389 ~~

where x is the ahargana and y the revolutions performed by the Sun.

(1)

The least integral solution of this comes out to be

x == 105345
y=288,

Actual calculation will show that solving problems of the
above type is a tedious affair. It is convenient to use the tables given
by Bhaskara I, given in Appendix II, p. 335 below. For example, in
the present case, Table 1 gives that the solution of the equation

576x—1

“210389?”
as x==94602, y=259. To get the values of x and y satisfying (1);
the process is as follows: Multiply 94602 by 86688 and divide the
product by 210389. This gives 105345 as the remainder, which is
the required value of x. Again, multiply 259 by 86688 and divide the
product by 576. This gives 288 as the remainder, which is the required
value of y.

 

1, The navamarnta Sagittarius of the sign Leo is the ninth
navamaiitéa (=ninth part) of that sign and extends from 146° 40’ to
150° of longitude. The longitude of the middle point of that
navamamésa is thus 148° 20’.

2. This example has beea solved by Govinda-svami and
Parame$vara in their commentaries on MBh, i. 47.

--- Page 434 ---
EXAMPLES OF BHASKARA 313

102. Given that 100 minutes of the eighth sign are to be
traversed by the Sun, say quickly, after giving careful thought, O
intelligent one, if the Gasita of As’maka (asmakasya_ ganitam) is
known to you, all the years that have elapsed this day since the
beginning of Kaliyuga, Also state correctly the number of days
elapsed since the beginning of Kaliyuga.? [Page 138, Ex. 8]

Solution Here, part of the revolution to be traversed by the

Sun=7 signs 100’.

The corresponding residue of the revolution is 123701. We have,
therefore, to solve the equation
576 x+123701 __
710389. ~=~*~C*«S (1)
where x is the required ahkargana and y—1 the number of years
elapsed. The least integral solution of (1) comes out to be

x= 105345
yi 3288.

According to Govinda-svimi’s and Paramesvara’s _ inter-
pretations, part of the revolutioa to be traversed by the Sun=4 signs
100’, The corresponding residue of the revolution is 71104. The,
resulting equation is

576 x +71 104
710389
of which the least solution is
x= 186889
y=512,
103, The signs together with the revolutions of (the mean

longitude of ) the Sun as calculated from the ahargana have been
blown away by the wind; 21 degrees and 59 minutes remain

 

 

—=

1, This example occurs also in the commentaries of Govinda-
svami and Paramesvara on MBA, i. 51.

. Exs. 101 and 102 are the illustrations of the so-called
revolution-pulverisert (mandala-kuttakara)-

Ado Alo ¥o

--- Page 435 ---
314 APPENDIX I

(undisturbed). Give out the traversed part (i.e., the longitude) of
’ the Sun as also the number of days (elapsed since the beginning of
Kaliyuga)." [Page 139, Ex. 9]

Solution. Here 21° 59’=1319’. Also since Sun’s revolution-
number : civil days in a yuga=576 : 210389,

 

Sun’s revolution-number reduced to signs — 6912
civil days in a yuga 210389 °

Multiplying 1319 by 210389 and dividing the product by 1800 (the
number of minutes in a sign), we get 154168 as the quotient. This
is the residue of the signs (rasisesa). The pulveriser to be solved is
therefore
6912 x—154168
210389

where x denotes the required ahargana and y the Sun’s mean longitude
in terms of complete signs,

Solving the above equation, we get x= 176564, y=5800.
Hence the ahargana==176564 days, and the Sun’s longitude== 483 revs.
4 signs 21° 59’.

Alternative Solution. Under the above example, Bhaskara I
refers to an alternative method which was used by certain astronomers
of his time. That method may be explained as follows :

Let b be the residue of the revolutions and r revs, s signs
21° 59’ be the Sun’s mean longitude. Ther

12 154168

10389 ~ °F 210386
12 b—154168_.
oF 210389. ra)
where 576x—~b =r
210389 7 (2)

x denoting the. ahargana as before,

1. This is an example of the so-called sign-pulveriser
(rasi-kuttakara). It occurs, in different words, in Raghunatha-raja’s
commentary on A, ii, 32-33. :

--- Page 436 ---
 

EXAMPLES OF BHASKARA 315

The value of 6 and s satisfying (1) may be derived from the

solution of _12 B—1 =S, as 154168 B=b and 154168 S=s. Thus
210589

b being determined, x and r are obtained by solving (2).

104. The revolutions, signs and degrees of the Sun’s (mean)
longitude (Jt. traversed by the Sun) have all been carried. away by the
wind ; 5 minutes are seen (to remain undisturbed). If you are well
versed in the Aimakiya (ie., the Aryabhatiya), say in a moment the
ahargana and the revolutions, etc., of (the longitude of ) the Sun.’

(Page 140, Ex. 10]

Solution. Since Sun’s revolution-number : civil day ina
yuga=576 : 210389, therefore, multiplying 5 by 210389 and dividing
the product by 60 (¢.e., the number of minutes in a degree), we obtain
17532 as the quotient. This is the residue of the degrees. We have,
therefore, to solve the pulveriser

576X360 x—17532
210389 ,
where x denotes the ahargana and y the number of complete degrees
traversed by the Sun in x days.

Solving the above pulveriser, we get x==62715, y==61812.
Hence the required ahargana =62715 days, and the Sun’s longitude
==171 revs. 8 signs 12° 5’.

Alternative Solution? Let R be the residue of the signs for
the Sun, and 4 the degrees of the Sun’s longitude. Then

30R 4 17532. 5, 30 R—17532
~~ 210389 210389" °” 210389

Solving this we get R and b. Now, proceeding as in the alternative
method of Ex. 103, we get the ahargana and the revolutions and signs
of the Sun’s longitude.

1. This is an example of the so-called degree-pulveriser
(bhaga-kuttakara). It reappears in Govinda-svami’s comm. on MBh,
i, 47 and Raghunatha-raja’s comm. on A, ii. 32-33,

3% Bhaskara I ascribes this method to other mathematicians.

--- Page 437 ---
316 APPENDIX I

105. The revolutions, signs, degrees and minutes (of the
mean longitude of the Sun) have been carried away by the wind:
(the remaining) 1 second is seen (undisturbed). Say the ahargana and
the revolutions, signs, degrees and minutes that have been traversed
by the Sun.? [Page 141, Ex. 11]

Solution, Multiplying 1 by 210389 and dividing the product
by 60, we get 3506 as the quotient ; this is the residue of the minutes.
We have, therefore, to solve the pulveriser

576 X 21600 x—3506 . 12441600x — 3506
sy, e., ——__-___——_ =y,_ (1)
210389 _ 210389

where x denotes the ahargana and y the minutes traversed by the Sun
in x days. Thus we get x= 125342, y=7412246. Hence the ahargana
+=125342 days and the Sun’s longitude=343 revs. 1 sign 27° 26’ 1’.

106. The mean longitude of the Sun (for sunrise) ona
Wednesday is stated to be 8 signs, 25 degrees, 36 minutes, and 10
seconds. State correctly after how much time (since the beginning of
Kaliyuga) will the Sun again assume the same position (at sunrise)
on a Thursday, Friday and Wednesday. [Page 142, Ex, 12]

Solution. (i) Ahargana for Wednesday

We first find the ahargana elapsed at sunrise on Wednesday
when the Sun’s mean longitude is 8 signs 25° 36’ 10°. Since the
Sun’s mean longitude ==8 signs 25° 36’ 10” or 956170”, the residue of
the revolutions =155222, [see MBA, i. 46 (c-d)]. Thus we have to
solve the equation

576x—155222
210389

’
en

1. This is an example of the so-called minute-pulveriser
(lipta-kuttakara). It reappears in Raghunatha-raja’s comm. on 4,
ii. 32-33.

2. This is an example of the so called week-day pulveriser
(vara-kuttakara). This example reappears in the commentaries of
Govinda-svami and Parameévara on MBh, i. 48 and in Ragunatha-
raja’s comm, on 4, ii, 32-33,

--- Page 438 ---
EXAMPLES OF BHASKARA 37

where x is the ahargana and y the revolutions performed by the Sun.
Solving this equation, we get x =1000, y=2. Hence the ahargana,
for the given Wednesday= 1000.

(ii) Ahargana for Thursday

Now, we have to find the ahargana elapsed at sunrise on a
Thursday when the Sun again occupies the same position.

Let the required ahargana be 1000+-A. Then in A days the
Sun will describe complete revolutions, Also, isince Thursday occurs
one day after Wednesday, the residue of the week-cycle is unity. In
other words,

516 A A—1
"and
210389 7

 

will be whole numbers. If we assume A to be a multiple of 210389,
we have simply to determine A such that 4A—I1 may be completely
divisible by 7. Let 4=210389 x. Then we have to solve the
equation

210389 x—1
7
4x—l1 , .¢
or = 2D

where y =30055 x+y’.

Evidently, a solution of (2) is x=2, y’=1, The corres-
ponding solution of (1) is x=2, p= 30055 X2+-1= 60111.

The required ahargana is therefore 1000 -+- 4 = 1000-+-210389x
es 1000-}- 210389 X 2 or 421778.
(iii) Ahargana for Friday

In this case, the residue of the week-cycle is 2. So, let the
ahargana be 10004210389 x. Then we have to solve the equation

 

1 —2
210389 x—2 __, 3)
7
4x2 _,
or = )

where y==30055 x+y’.

--- Page 439 ---
318 APPENDIX I

Evidently, a solution of (4) is x=4, y’==2. The corresponding
solution of (3) is x=4, y==30055x+2=120222. The required
ahargana is therefore 842556.

(iv) Ahargana for next Wednesday

As before, let the ahargana be 1000+210389 x, In this case,
the residue of the week-cycle is 0 and so x=7, so that the required
ahargana is 1473723.

107. The signs and degrees traversed by the Sun have been
blown away by the wind; the minutes to be traversed amount to
11 +25 (i.e., 36). State the “ahargana and (the mean longitude of)
the Sun.} *[Page 143, Ex. 13]

Solution. Since the minutes to be traversed are given to be
36, the minutes traversed are 60—36—= 24,

Multiplying 24 by 210389 and dividing the product by 60, we
obtain 84156 as the quotient. This is the residue of the degrees. We,
have, therefore, to solve the pulveriser

576 x 360 x—84156 207360 x—84156
=y, ie, ——__ ey, (1)

210389 210389
where x denotes the required ahargana and y the degrees traversed by
the Sun in x days.

From Table 1 (see below, Appendix II, p. 335), we find that
the least integral solution of (207360 x—1)/210389=y is x= 59873,
y=59011. To get the solution of (1), we multiply 59873 and 59011
by 84156 and divide the resulting products by 210389 and 207360,
respectively. The remainders of the two divisions are 66027 and
65076, respectively. These give the values of x and y satisfying (1),
Hence ahargana=66027 days and the Sun’s longitude==180 revs.

9 signs 6° 24’,

 

1. This is another example of the degree-pulveriser, but
instead of the minutes traversed being given, the minutes to be
traversed have been given. Raghun&tha-raja gives a similar example
with 36 as minutes traversed,

--- Page 440 ---
EXAMPLES OF BHASKARA 319

Alternative Solution. The minutes to be traversed by the Sun
are equal to 36. Multiplying 36 by 210389 and dividing the product
by 60, we obtain 126233 as the quotient. We have, therefore, to solve
the equation

576 x 360 x-+126233_ 207360 x-4-126233__
210389 OP? 35 HRQ OO

where x denotes the ahargana and (y—1) the degrees traversed by the
Sun in x days.

From Table | (see below, Appendix II, p. 335), we find that
the least integral solution of (207360 x —1)/210389 =p is x= 59873,
y=59011; therefore the least integral solution of (207360x-+- 1)/210389
=y is ¥=210389—59873 = 150516, y=207360—5901 1 — 148349,

To get the solution of (1), we maltiply 150516 and 148349 by
126233 and divide the resulting products by 210389 and 207360,
respectively, The remainders of the two divisions are 66027 and
65077, respectively. These are the values of x and y satisfying
equation (1).

108. The Sun and Moon on a Sunday at sunrise are care-
fully seen by me to be in (the sign) Libra. The degrees of their ,
(mean) longitudes are 12 and 2, respectively; the minutes are 1 and
40, respectively. After how many days will they assume the same
longitudes again (at sunrise) on a Thursday, Friday, and Saturday,
respectively ? (It is also given that) the (mean) longitude of the Sun
is in excess by 17 seconds (over that given above) ; whereas from the
(mean) longitude of the Moon (given above) 18 seconds have to be
subtracted. [Page 144, Ex, 14]

Solution. Sun’s longitude on Sunday=6 signs 12° 1’ 17”
Moon’s longitude on Sunday=6 signs 2° 39’ 42”

It can be found easily that the Sun and Moon assume these
longitudes when ahargana=7500 days.

 

 

 

1. This is an example of the week-day pulveriser with two
residues. This example occurs also in the author’s Maha-Bhaskariya
(viii, 21-22), and reappears in Govinda-svami’s comm. on MBA, i. 48
and, ia different words, in Raghunatha-raja’s comm. on A, ii, 32-33,

--- Page 441 ---
320 APPENDIX 1

The problem now is to find the ahargana when the Sun and
Moon assume the above longitudes at sunrise on a Thursday, Friday
and Saturday, respectively.

(i) Akargane for Thursday

Let the ahargana be 7500-44. Obviously, in A days the Sun
and Moon will describe complete revolutions. Also since Thursday
occurs 4 days after Sunday, A—4 will be perfectly divisible by 7.
In other words,

576 A 78898 A A—4
“ar0389* 2155635 MF
will be whole numbers. If we assume A=131493125 x (where
131493125 is the L.C.M. of 210389 and 2155625), the first two
fractions will obviously be whole numbers, and we have only to make
(131493125 x—4)/7 a whole number. Let

131493125 x—4 __

 

7 ,
x—4
or = =z, where y=18784732 x+-z.
Solving this equation, we see that x=4 makes (131493125 x—4)7
a whole number. Therefore the required ahargana
= 7500+ A = 75004 131493125 x
==7500-+ 131493125 x4

== 525980000 days.

ii) Ahargana for Friday

In this case, the required ahargana is obviously equal to
7500 + 131493125 x 5, i.e., 657473125 days.

(iti) Ahargana for Saturday

In this case, in the same way, the required ahargana

==7500-+ 131493125 x6, i.e., 788966250 days.

109. The sum of the (mean) longitudes of the Sun and the
Moon is seen to be 1 sign, 5 degrees and 30 minutes. State the
ahargana and the number of (complete) revolutions performed (by
them).* . [Page 145, Ex. 15]

 

1. This example, stated in different words, reappears in
Raghunatha-raja’s comm. on A, ii, 32-33.

--- Page 442 ---
EXAMPLES OF BHASKARA 321

Solution. The revolutions of the Sun and the Moon in
1577917500 days are, respectively, 4320000 and 57753336. Therefore,
assuming that x is the required akargana and y the sum of the
revolutions traversed by the Sun and Moon both, we have

(4320000 + 57753336) __ : ° ant
7397917500 =y revs. 1 sign 5° 30
5172778 x __ 2130 _ 12966683

oF 131493125 7 + 1600 T'S =F p3rgosia5 Os
neglecting a fraction in the numerator on the right because it must be
integral,

5172778 x—12966683

or —_731493125—~C~CS

Solving this, we get x==87942886, y=3459565. Hence the
required ahargana = 87942886 days. The revolutions performed by the
Sun. and the Moon may be easily derived from the ahargana.

110. The (mean) longitude of Mars at the time of the
completion of a revolution of the (mean) Sun is seen to be 2 signs, 15
degrees and 5 minutes. State the revolutions performed by Mars and
the Sun." [Page 145, Ex. 16]

Solution. Let x be the ahargana and y and z the revolutions
performed by the Sun and Mars, respectively. Then we have

576 x
210389 @
191402 x : ©
and 731493195 7 te": 2 signs 15° 5’, Q)

because Sun’s revolution number: civil days in puga =576/210389,
and Mars’ revolution-number : civil days in a yuga=191402/131493125,
Eliminating x between (1) and (2), we get

210389 x 191402 py __ 4505

Tex isigaaias ~ 7 + aie00 TS

1, This example reappears in Govinda-svami’s comm. on
MBh, i. 52 and in Raghunatha-raja’s comm. on A, ii. 32-33.

Ato WIo ¥Y

--- Page 443 ---
322 APPENDIX I
gS70ly_ 4 37542

“180000 -— 180000
neglecting a fraction in the numerator on the right,

95701 y—37542 _
180000 (3)

Solving (3), we get y=68142, z =36229,

or revs.,

or

111, Jupiter having ascended the middle point of the degree
occupied by its own Ucca, what is the (arcual) distance traversed
(since the beginning of Kaliyuga) by the Sua who has illumined by the
profusion of its lustre the faces of the quarters ? —asks an Asmakiya
(i.e., a disciple of Aryabhata I). O you of vast intellect, quickly tell
him (the answer).! [Page 146, Ex. 17]

By the middle point of the degree occupied by Jupiter’s Ucca,
Bhaskara I means that point whose longitude is 3 signs, 4 degrees
and 30 minutes. Evidently, Bhaskara I is reférring to the position
of Jupiter’s Ucca mentioned in the Hindu works on nativity (Jataka
or Hora). According to the Brhajjataka (i. 13) of Varahamihira,
Jupiter’s Ucca lies in the fifth degree of Cancer. This is what
Bhaskara I means in the above example when he speaks of the degree
occupied by Jupiter’s Ucca. Thus, the longitude of Jupiter meant in
the above example=3 signs 4° 30’=5670".

Solution. Let x be the Sun’s longitude reduced to minutes of
arc and y the revolutions traversed by Jupiter (since the beginning of
Kaliyuga). Then (vide MBh, i. 10) we have

xe (21600 y +5670) x 4320000

364224

or 364224 x—5670 X 4320000 __
31600 4320000.«2~0~

or 1897 x—127575000 _
486000000 ~~ *

Solving this equation, we get x = 78975000'=3656 revs,
3 signs, and y==308 revs.

ee

 

 

1, This example reappears in Raghunatha-raja’s comm, on
A, ii, 32-33.

--- Page 444 ---
EXAMPLES OF BHASKARA 323

112, The (mean) longitude of the Sun for midnight is found

to be 9 signs, 15 degrees, 32 minutes, and 40 seconds (if. 2/3 of a

minute). Quickly say the aargena and the revolutions (performed
by the Sun) according to the As’makiya (ie., the Aryabhatiya),)

[Page 147, Ex. 18]

Solution. Mean longitude of the Sun==9 signs 15° 32’ 40’.
Hence, the residue of the revolutions 166876. [See MBh, i. 46 (c-d)].
We have, therefore, to solve the equation

576 (x4) — 166876
210389

where x~——} is the required ahargana and y the revolutions performed
by the Sun, or
144 X-166876 _ (1)
210389 ~—SO?

where X¥=4x—l1

Solving (1), we get Y=7003, y==4, giving x=1751.

Hence the required ahargana is 1750% and the number of
revolutions performed by the sun is 4.

113. The (mean) longitude of the Sun, (partly) hidden .
behind the lofty peak of the Sunset Mountain, in terms of revolutions,
etc., is completely forgotten. The residue of the minutes is, however,
correctly known to be 103. Quickly say the ahargana reckoned from
the beginning of Kaliyuga as also the (mean) longitude of the Sun in
terms of revolutions, etc.” [Page 148, p. 19]

Solution, Let x-++4 be the ahargana and y the number of
minutes traversed by the Sun at sunset since the beginning of
Kaliyuga. Then

576 x 21600 (x-+4)—103 __
———F10389 =

ee

_ 1. This example reappears in Raghunatha-raja’s comm. on
A, ii, 32-33.

2. This example reappears in Raghunatha-raja’s comm. on
4, ii, 32-33,

--- Page 445 ---
324 APPENDIX I

12441600 A—206 _
210389 = &, ())
where A=2x-++-1, B=2y.

or

From Table 1 (see below, Appendix II, p. 335) the values of
a, ¥ satisfying the equation (12441600 %&—-1)/210389=—=y are « =81647,
Y= 4828291. Therefore, multiplying 81647 by 206 and dividing
the product by 210389 we get 198551 as the remainder; this is the
value of A in (1), Again multiplying 4828291 by.205 and dividing the
product by 12441600 we get 11741546 as the remainder; this is the
value of 8 in (1).

Thus we have x==99275 and y=5870773.

Hence the required ahargana is 99275} days andthe mean
longitude of the Sun is 5870773 minutes, i.e., 271 revs. 9 signs 16° 13’,

114, The residue of the revolutions of the meridian Sun,
who has brightened up the faces of the quarters by the bundle of its
brilliant rays, is seen to -be 154790, Let the akargana and the revolu-
tions performed (by the Sun) in that time be given out by one who
has properly studied the indeterminate analysis taught in the
Asmakiya.* [Page 148, Ex, 20]

Solution. Let x-+} be the ahargana and y the revolutions
performed by the Sun. Then

576 (x+-1/4)—154790 __
~ 210389 © ~

or 144 u—154790 __
310389 ~~O*~*«<C‘C

"4

 

where u=4x-++-1,

Solving this equation, we get u=3997, y=2. Therefore
x==999. Hence the required ahargana==999} days and the revolutions
performed by the Sun=2.

115. The revolutions, etc., of the Sun’s mean longitude,
calculated from an ahargana plus a few nadis elapsed, have now been
destroyed by the wind ; the residue of the minutes is seen by me to

———

 

1. This example reappears {in Raghunatha-raja’s comm, on
A, ii, 32-33,

--- Page 446 ---
EXAMPLES OF BHASKARA 325

be equal to 71. State the ahargana, the Sun’s (mean) longitude, and
the correct number of the nadis (used in the calculation).
[Page 149, Ex. 21]

Solution. Here we have to solve the equation
576 x 12x 30 x 60 (x+n/60)—71 _ a)
210389 ;
where x is the ahargana, y the minutes traversed by the Sun since the
beginning of Kaliyuga, and n the nadis elapsed.

(1) may be written as

207360 X—71 __
310389 ~*~ 2)
where X=: 60x -+ 7.

Solving (2), we get Y=43203, y=42581, whence we have
x=720, 'n=3.

Hence the required ahargana is 720, the nddis elapsed are 3,
and the mean longitude of the Sun is 42581 minutes, ie., 1 rev.
11 signs 19° 41’,

116. 825 multiplied by 100 is the number denoting the
residue of the revolutions of the Sun as determined from the (tabulated)
revolutions and civil days as they are (i.e., without abrading them).
Calculate therefrom the ahargana and the revolutions (performed by
the Sun).” [Page 150, Ex. 22]

Solution. Let x denote the ahargana and y the revolutions
made by the Sun. Then
4320000 x— 82500 __
1577917500

576 x—11 __
210389

y

or

 

1. This example occurs also in the author’s Maha-Bhas-
Kariya (viii. 23), It reappears in Govinda-svami’s comm. on MBh,
i. 49 and in Raghunatha-raja’s comm. on A, ii. 32-33.

Exs. 112 to 115 are examples of the time-pulveriser (vela-
kuttakara). Ex.115, in particular, is an example of the ghatika-
kuttakdra.

_ 2. This example reappears in Raghunatha-raja’s comm, on
A, ii, 32-33.

--- Page 447 ---
 

326 APPENDIX I

Solving this equation, we get x=199066, y—=545. Hence the
required ahargana= 199066 days ; and the revolutions performed by
the Sun==545.

117. Some number of days is (severally) divided by the
(abraded) civil days for the Sun and for Mars (i.e., by 210389 and
131493125, respectively). The (resulting) quotients are unknown to
me; the residues, too, are not seen by me. The quotients obtained
by multiplying those residues by the respective (abraded) revolution-
numbers (7.¢., by 576 and 191402, respectively) and then dividing (the
products) by the respective (abraded) civil days are also blown away
by the wind. The remainders of the two (divisions) now exist. The
remainder for the Sun is 38472, and that for Mars is 77180625. From
these remainders severally calculate, O mathematician, the aharganas
for the Sun and Mars, the revolutions performed, and also the number
of days conforming to the two residues and state them in proper
order. [Page 150, Ex. 23]

Solution, The abraded revolution-number and the abraded
civil days for the Sun are 576 and 210389, respectively ; the same
for Mars are 191402 and 131493125, respectively.

Let A be the ahargana conforming to the two residues.
Then let

A =x 4 a
210389 210389 ()
A my 4 b
131493125 ~~ “737493135
and
576 a 38472
210389 e+ 210389
191402 b 4 77180625 Q)
131493125 “131493125

where A, x, y, a, 5, B, A are all unknown quantities. The problem is
to find a and } and therefrom A,

 

1. This example occurs also in the author’s Maha-Bhdas-
kariya (viii. 24-24+). It reappears in Govinda-svami’s comm. on
MBh, i. 52 and in Raghunatha-raja’s comm. on A, ii. 32-33, In the
latter, it is stated in different words,

--- Page 448 ---
EXAMPLES OF BHASKARA 327

Equations (2) reduce to
576 a—38472__

210389 =B (3)
191402 677180625
131493125 (4)

Solving (3), we get a==8833, B—24 ; and solving (4), we get
b==640000, A=931,
Hence the ahargana for the Sun is 8833, and that for Mars
640000. -
Equations (1) now reduce to
A=210389 x-+-8833 = 131493125 y+640000,
whence we get the equation
210389 x—631167 _
131493125 ~~
. x—3
1. @,, 695 =). (5)
The least solution of (5) is evidently
x=3, y=0.
Hence A=640000, which is the ahargana corresponding to the
two residues. Bhaskara I gives

A=131493125 x 1875-+-640000
= 246550249375,
which corresponds to y—=1875, x==1875X 625 +3.

Govinda-svami and Raghunatha-raja_ take x==628, y==1 as
the solution of (5), and so they obtain A 132133125,

118. The residues (of the revolutions) of the Sun and Moon
as obtained by the application of the so-called orbital method are
stated to be 19350444582 and 12691000000, respectively. State
the dvyagra, the ahargana and also the revolutions performed by them
since the beginning of Kaliyuga. [Page 151, Ex, 24]

Solution. The orbital method of finding the longitude of a
planet is the application of the formula :?
(orbit of the sky) x (ahargana)

longi lanet = : — :
Mean longitude of a plane (orbit of the planet) x (civil days in yuga)

 

 

 

1. This example reappears in Govinda-svami’s comm, on
MBA, i. 52 and in Raghunatha-raja’s comm. on J, ii, 32-33.

2. See MBh, i, 20.

--- Page 449 ---
328 APPENDIX I

Solution, Now, the orbit of the sky==12474720576000 yojanas,
civil days in a yuga= 1577917500, Sun’s orbit = 2887666 + # yojanas,
and Moon’s orbit= 216000 yojanas. Therefore

12474720576000 x ahargana

Sun’s longitude =——~ 4-56 499977880000 revs.
_ 136335744 x ahargana revs
49797813966 cvs

dividing the numerator and denominater by 91500.

12474720576000 x ahargana

ss , it d a CTT e aN
Similarly, Moons longitude 316000 X 1577917500 revs,
__ 136335744 x ahargana y
~ 3724920000 2

the abrader being 91500 as above.

Let x and y denote the complete revolutions performed by
the Sun and the Moon, respectively. Then
136335744 x ahargana= 49797813966 x-+ 19350444582 (1)

= 3724920000 y-+ 1269000000,
3724920000 y — 18081444582 __

that
so tha 49797813966 ’
180000 y—873753
or = 2X,
2406389

dividing the numerator and the denominator on the left by 20694.
Solving this equation, we get x =3723, y=49777.

Therefore, the revolutions performed by the Sun and the Moon
are 3723 and 49777, respectively. Also from (1), the required
ahargana = 1360000 days. The so-called dvyagra-rasi= 136335744 x
ahargana = 185416611840000.

119. The residues of the minutes for the Sun and the Moon
have been calculated by the so-called orbital method (and found) to
be 16550354562 and 2438640000, respectively. From them (determine
and) state the revolutions, etc., traversed by them, and the ahargana,

and from them the dvyagra conforming to the two residues.
{Pages 152-53, Ex, 25]

Solution. Following Bhaskara I, we find out the residues of
the revolutions of the Sun and the Moon separately..

--- Page 450 ---
EXAMPLES OF BHASKARA $29
Residue of the revolutions of the Sun

Let A be the ahargana and R revolutions, S signs, D degrees
and M minutes the longitude of the Sun. Also let 6r,6s, and 6d
be, respectively, the residues of the revolutions, signs and degrees for
the Sun. Then, (as in the previous example),

136335744 A

. / | 16550354562
ER -+S D deg. M+——__—_—— in,
49797813966 "Vs FS signs + D deg + + ip707813066)
«o that _ 606d —_ yy 4 16550354562
49797813966 49797813966
60d—2758392427
or eee (i)
8299635661
or 60x—1
8299635661 ” (2)

where 2758392427x =d and 2758392427) = M.

The least integral solution of (2) is x=8161308400, yo 59;
and, likewise, the least integral solution of (1) is d=7377318041,

M=53,
Next, we have

30s—7377318041
8299635061. (3)

giving s= 5502346520, D=19.

Finally, we have

125502346520
8299635661 ~~ (4)
12n—1
oO a ee
r 8299635061 (6)

where r= 5502346520 A, S =5502346520 nu,

The least integral solution of (5) is 47607999356, p=11;
and, likewise, r= 3225074097, S=4.

Hence the residue of the revolutions for the Sun==6r or
19350444582.

Aldo Ale ¥z

--- Page 451 ---
330 APPENDIX I

Residue of the revolutions for the Moon

In this case, let R revolutions, S signs, D degrees and M
minutes be the longitude of the Moon and Ar, As, and Ad the residues
of the revolutions, signs, and degrees, respectively (A=1080000).
Then, as in the previous example,

136335744 A 2438640000
136335744 AR evs. +S D deg, + ( m 243864000
3724920000 revs. +S signs +D deg +( 3754920000
so that 6OXAd___ ny, 2438640000
3724920000 3724920000
60d—2258
or ————=_ = M
3449 (5)
or 60x—1 .
3449. (6)

where 2258x=d, and 2258y=M.

The least integral solution of (6) is x=1782, y=31. There-
fore the least integral solution of (5) is d=2222, M=38.

Next, we have
308-2222 7
3449—~C*~? ™

giving s=304, D=2,

Finally, we have
12r—304 s
3449. °~*S (8)
giving r=1175, S=4/

Hence the residue of the revolutions for the Moon=Ar or
1269000000.

Thus we see that the resulting residues of the revolutions for
the Sun and the Moon are exactly the same as those given in Ex. 118.
Hence the remaining process of this example is the same as detailed
under Ex, 118. And the answer to this example is naturally the
same as obtained there.

——_

1, The solution of the equation (30 s—1)/3449=D is s=115,
D=1.

2. The solution of the equation (12 r—1)/3449=S is r=2012,
S<7.

 

--- Page 452 ---
EXAMPLES OF BHASKARA 331

120. The residue of the revolutions of the Sun is stated to
be 330463534120230 ; that of the Moon, 25707922430400 ; and that of
Jupiter, 3691566987755400 ; these being determined by the orbital
method. Find the tryagra (i.e. the number satisfying the three
residues), the ahargana and the revolutions (performed by those
planets), if you are well versed in the variety of the pulveriser
as told by ASmaka (i.e., Aryabhata J).4 [Pages 154-55, Ex. 26]

Solution: Since

orbit of the sky x ahargana
orbit of the planet civil days ina yuga

, . 124 576000 x ahargana
“ Sun’s longitude= ——
887666 +.4/5) (1577917500)
1247472057600 X ahargana
4556499977889000
— 1293144531840 x ahargana
472332265467510

dividing the numerator and denominator by 18300/1897,
Similarly,

Mean longitude of a planet=

 

>

1293144531840 x ahargana
353 30866200000
1293144531840 x ahargana
3602254071175000

Moon’s longitude =

and = Jupiter’s longitude

Assuming, therefore, that A is the ahargana and x, y, z the complete
revolutions traversed by the Sun, Moon and Jupiter, respectively, we
have to solve the equations
1293144531840 A= 472332265467510 x-+330463534120230 (1)
== 35330866200000 y-+-25707922430400 (2)
= 5602254071175000 z-+-3691566987755400 (3)
From (1) and (2), we get
35330866200000 y-—304755611689830 =x

 

472332265467510 ,
180000 y—1552637 _
2406389
Solving this equation, we get x=3767, y=50369,

or

 

 

1. This example reappears in Govinda-svami’s comm, on,
MBA, i. 32,

--- Page 453 ---
332 APPENDIX I
Now, we have to solve the equations
1293144531840 A= 472332265467510 x 35330866200000 A
+ 1779606 107550230400
= 16687908073175476257162000000 A
-++1779606107550230400 (4)
= 5602254071175000 z+ 3691566987755400, (3)

or 5602254071175000 z— 1775914540562475000 _
1€687908073175476257 162000000 ,

or 237
2978784585850 (5)
The least integral solution of this equation is 2==317, A=0.
Putting A~0 in (4), we get

1779606107550230400
1293144531840 (5)

= 1376185.

Hence, from (1), (2), and (3), we have x = 3767, y=50369 and
z=317.

Hence the required ahargana is 1376185 and the complete
revolutions performed by the Sun, Moon and Jupiter are 3767, 50369
and 317, respectively.

Also the tryagra== 1293144531840 A
== 1293144531840 x 1376185
= 1779606107550230400.

121. I will become a disciple of him who can obtain the
intercalary months (elapsed) from the (given) omitted lunar days, or
the omitted lunar days (elapsed) from the (given) intercalary months,
or an (unknown) planet from them. [Page 195, Ex. 1]

122. 20751576 is the number denoting the residue of the
omitted Junar days (avamasesa). _From this calculate and then speak
out the residue of the revolutions of the Sun and also the longitude of
the Sun correct to minutes of are. [Page 195, Ex. 2]

--- Page 454 ---
EXAMPLES OF BHASKARA 333

Solution : Bhaskara I applies a very ingenious method for
solving this problem. His method is as follows :

Solving the pulveriser

(omitted lunar days in a yuga) y—(Sun’s revolution-number)
civil days in a yuga
==a whole number,

~ 25082580 y— 4320000

=a whole number,
1577917500

or, abrading the left-hand fraction by 60,

418043 y—72000
26298625
we get y= 10952125,

=a whole number,

Then we multiply the given residue 20751576 by 10952125 and
divide the product by 26298625 ; or, what is the same thing, we
multiply 20751576 by 87617 and divide the product by 210389. Thus
we get 8642043 as the quotient and 49665 as the remainder. This
remainder is the required residue of the revolutions of the Sun.

The longitude of the Sun==49665/210389 revolutions or 2 signs
24° 58',

Rationale of the above method: Let the integers x and y be
chosen in such a way that

(omitted lunar days in a yuga) y—(Sun’s revolution number)
civil days in a yuga

x=

Now, let A denote the ahargana. Then

Axs= (omitted lunar days in yuga) X (ahargana)
civil days in a yuga

 

___(Sun’s revolution-number) X (ahargana)
civil days in a yuga

 

 

_ { 4. Tesidue of the omitted lunar days \
=U civil days in yuga ?

—fg +p tesidue of the revolutions of the Sun
{ 3 civil days in a yuga }

--- Page 455 ---
 

334 APPENDIX I

(residue of the omitted lunar days) y—(residue of
_ _ the revolutions of the Sun)

a er . civil days in a yuga ,
which shows tha’

(residue of the omitted lunar days) y-(residue of the revolutions of the Sun)

 

 

civil days in a yuga
(1)

must be a whole number.

It follows that if y is chosen in such a manner that (1) isa

(residue of the omitted lunar days) y
civil days in a yuga

 

whole number, then will yield

‘the residue of the revolutions of the Sun’ as the remainder.

123, One who, without applying the rules of our Siddhanta*
(i. e., Aryabhatiya), derives the Moon’s longitude from the Sun’s
longitude, and the longitudes of the star-planets from that of the

Moon is said to be the foremost amongst the astronomers.
[Page 196, Ex. 3]

124. Quickly calculate how many years and how many
days of the (current) yuga had elapsed when the traversed part of
the Moon’s apogee amounted to three signs.* [Page 200, Ex 1]

Solution : We have to solve the pulveriser

488219 x—1080000
4320000

where x is the number of years required.

=a whole number,

Solving the pulveriser, we get x==3240000 years, the days
elapsed being obviously = #3 X 1577917500 = 1183438125,

1. The residue of the revolutions of a planet may also be
obtained in the same way.

2. The reading Aimaka-siddhanta may be suggested in place
of Asmat-siddhanta in the text. In that case, ‘our Siddhanta’ in the
above translation would have to be changed to ‘the Aimaka-siddhanta’ .

3. This example, stated in different words, occurs also in
Raghunatha-raja’s comm, on A, ili, 9,

--- Page 456 ---
APPENDIX I

BHASKARA’S TABLES
FOR
THE CONSTANT PULVERISER ax—l=by

The following tables give the values of x and y corresponding to
the values of a and b that arise in the problems in astronomy.

A. Tables for Longitudes of Planets, Apogees, Ascending Nodes, ete.

1. Table for the Sun

a b x y
576 210389 94602 259
6912 210389 113078 3715
207360 210389 59873 59011
12441600 210389 81647 4828291
746496000 210389 60971 216335491
4478976000 210389 144782 30822671491
2687385600000 210389 9426 120402191491

2. Table for the Moon

nn RE

 

a b x y
78898 2155625 716837 28433
946776 2155625: 2040726 896311
5680656 431125 340121 4481555
68167872 86225 21158 16727119
818014464 17245 16134 765314315
9816173568 3449 6518 18550831927
588970414080 3449 2293 391565427511

 

335

--- Page 457 ---
536 APPENDIX If

3. Table for the Moon’s Apogee
—— eee

a 5 x y
488219 1577917500 718667879 222361
488219 131493125 61202254 227237
2929314 26298625 18966584 2112623
35151768 5259725 5087032 33997627
421821216 1051945 73271 29381063
5061854592 210389 93768 2256011395
303711275520 210389 169874 , 245225031811

OC eeeeeeeSSeSsee

4. Table for the Moon’s Ascending Node
SSS

 

a 5 x y

116113 788958750 625606177 92072
232226 131493125 115563401 204093
1393356 26298625 23643671 - 1252691
16720272 5259725 4161858 13230235
200643264 1051945 872794 166472807
2407719168 210389 37668 431077507
144463150080 210389 168939 116001597571

ee

5. Table for Mars

 

a b x y

191402 131493125 16101213 23437
2296824 131493125 34215049 597643
13780944 26298625 1319404 691391
165371328 5259725 1863192 58580731
1984455936 1051945 155266 292903655
23813471232 210389 188263 21309077635
1428808273920 210389 48722 330884203651

eee erent penne

--- Page 458 ---
BHASKARA‘S TABLES 337

6. Table for Mercury

 

a : b x y

896851 78895875 23587276 268129
3587404 26298625 5896819 804387
21524424 5259725 1859424 . 7609339
258293088 1051945 154952 38046695
3099517056 210389 153172 22565 78179
185971023360 210389 184890 163431465091

11158261401600 210389 108276 5742562165891
ee

7. Table for Jupiter

a b x y

30352 131493125 76053038 17555
364224 131493125 28253274 78259
2185344 26298625 4708879 391295
26224128 5259725 830717 4141819
314689536 1051945 682861 204277991
3776274432 210389 179632 3224216707
226576465920 210389 185331 199590487171

8. Table for Venus

 

 

a b x y

585199 131493125 70046049 311734
7022388 131493125 38710452 2067331
42134328 26298625 6451742 10336655
3505611936 5259725 1414266 135951931
6067343232 1051945 643828 3713431271
72808118784 210389 123782 42836529283
4368487127040 210389 9076 188452766851

a hee
aiio Wo vz

--- Page 459 ---
338

a

36641
146564
879384
10552608
126631296
1519575552
91174533120

 

APPENDIX IL

9. Table for Saturn

 

b x
394479375 113065211
131493125 61139584
26298625 18956139
§259725 264747
1051945 811021
210389 190312
210389 185509

10. Table for the Moon’s Anomaly

¥

10502
68147
633863
331163
97629287
1374565507
80392494211

 

SS SAS

 

a b x y
57265117 1577917500 341213953 12383193
57265117 131493125 78227703 34068082
343590702 26298625 26187263 342135761
4123088424 5259725 4373824 3428632315
49477061088 1051945 13837 650807879
593724733056 210389 123880 349593467011
35623483983360 210389 142324 24098582789251

PUSS, SiS

B. Miscellaneous Tables

11. Table for Intercalary Months

a a ec SSS Sttiriissnhienssssel

a

132778
1593336
9560016
114720192
1376642304
16519707648
991182458880

b

131493125
131493125
26298625
3259725
1051945
210389
210389

x

18900317
122110391
24734836
3814478
142549
134606
93412

y

19085
1479643
8991551
83197819
186548711
10569239683
440081638531

 

--- Page 460 ---
BHASKARA’S TABLES 339

12. Table for Intercalary Days
ee eee ee

a b x y

 

(intercalary days) (solar days)
66389 2160000 672509 20670

13. Table for Omitted Days

 

a b x y
(omitted days) (lunar days)
418043 26716668 6247031 97749

se

14. Table for the Sun’s Declination

a b x y

(Rsine of the obliquity (radius)
of the ecliptic)

1397 3438 347 141

 

C. Solution of ax+1=by. If x=a, yx 8 be a solution of
ax—1=<by, then
x=b—«, y=a—B
is a solution of ax+1=by.

--- Page 461 ---
APPENDIX Ill

BHASKARA’S
TERMS FOR MATHEMATICAL OPERATIONS
1. Addition (+)

The terms used to denote the operation of addition are derived
from the roots as (with prefix sama; to be united or added), i (with
prefix anu, upa, sama, or saha; to be connected, united or added),
kal (with prefix sam; to add or sumup), ksip (to throw, to add),
ci (with prefix upa; to increase), da (to give), pind (to unite), prc
(with prefix sam; to unite or add, to be united or added), mifr
(to combine, to add), vrdh (to increase), yu (to unite, mix or combine)
and yuj (to unite, to add). The following forms have been used by
Bhaskara I :?

(i) Forms derived from the root as :
samasta, samasa, samasita.

(ii) Forms derived from the root i:

anvita, upeta, samanvita, samaveta, sameta, sahita.
(ii) Forms derived from the root kal :

satnkalana, samkalita.
(iv) Forms derived from the root ksip :

ksipa, ksipta, ksiptam, ksiptva, ksipet, ksipyate,
ksipyante, ksepa, ksepyam, ksepya,  pariksipya,
pariksipyante, praksipet, praksipta, praksipya, praksi-
pyate, praksipyante, praksepa, viniksipet, samksepa.

(v) Forms derived from the root ci:
upacaya, upacita, upaciyante, upaciyamana.
(vi) Forms derived from the root da:

datva, datavya, diyate, diyante, deya, deya.

 

1. To save space we have abstained from giving the derivations
of the various forms and the references.

340

--- Page 462 ---
TERMS FOR MATHEMATICAL OPERATIONS 341
(vii) Forms derived from the root pind :
pindita, sampindya.
(viii) Form derived from the root pre :
samparka,
(ix) Forms derived from the root miér :
misrita, sammisra.
(x) Forms derived from the root vrdh :
vardhate, vivardhate, vrddhi.
(xi) Forms derived from the root yu :
yuta, yuti, sarnyuta, samyuti.
(xii) Forms derived from the root yuj :

niyojya, yukta, yukti, yuktya, yoga, yojayitavyam,
yojayet, yojita, yojyam, yojya, yojyate, yojyante,
yojyah, vintyojya, satnyukta, samyoga, samyojita,
samyojya, samyojyamana.

(xiii) Other terms and forms :

adhika, adhya (antonym of vihina), ekikrta, kalpa
(addition), dhana (addition), udaya (addition).

Subtraction (— )

The terms for the operation of subtraction are derived from the

roots as (with prefix apa ; to throw away, to discard); i (with prefix
apa; to leave, to omit), un (to lessen), r (to give up), ksi (to decay
or waste, to cause to waste away, to diminish), grah (to take away),
ci (with prefix apa; to diminish), tyaj (to abandon, to discard),
ni (with prefix apa ; to remove or take away), pat (to reduce, subtract,
or deduct), yuj (with prefix vi, to disunite), rah (to leave, to abandon),
yy (with prefix vi; to open), vyj (to exclude, to abandon), Sis (to leave
as a remainder), ‘udh (to purify, cleanse, wash off ), s/is (with prefix vi ;
to disunite), ha (to diminish or decrease), and hras (to diminish).
The following forms have been used by Bhaskara | :

(i) Form derived from the root as :
apasya.
(ii) Form derived from the root? :
apaya.

--- Page 463 ---
342

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

(x)

(xi)

(xii)

_ (xiii)

(xiv)

(xv)

(xvi)

APPENDIX III

Forms derived from the root gn:
una, anakam.
Form derived from the root 7 :
yna.
Form derived from the root ksi :
saya,
Form derived from the root grah :
pragrhya.
Forms derived from the root ci :
apacaya, apacayatmaka, apaciyate, apaciyante.
Forms derived from the root tyaj :
tyaktva, tyajet, tyajyante.
Forms derived from the root ni :
apanayana, apanayet, apanite, apaniya, apaniyate,
apaniyante, samapaniya.
Forms derived from the root pat :
nipatita, nipatya, patita, patayitva, patita, patyate.
Forms derived from the root yuj :
viyukti, viyoga.
Forms derived from the root rah :
rahita, yirahita.
Forms derived from the root pr :

vivara, vivarakam.

Forms derived from the root vyj :
varjita, vivarjita.

Forms derived from the root sis :
avasista, avasesa, visista, visisyate, visesa, visesana,
visesita, visesyate, Sista, sigyate, Sesa, Sesayet.

Forms derived from the root sudh :

parisuddha, parisodhya, pravisuddha, prayisodhayet,
pravisodhya, visuddha, visodhayet, yisSodhita, visodhite,
vigodhyam, visodhya, visodhyate, visodhyante, yisodhya,
suddham, Suddha, suddhi, suddhe, Suddhyati, suddhy-

--- Page 464 ---
TERMS FOR MATHEMATICAL OPERATIONS $43

anti, §uddhyante, Ssuddhyet, sodhita, $odhanam,
fodhaniyam, sodhayitva, sodhayet, sodhyam, Sodhya,
fodhyate, sodhya, samsuddha, samsuddhi.

(xvii) Forms derived from the root élis :
aviglista, vislista, viSlesa, vislesita.

(xviii) Forms derived from the root Aa:
parihina, vihina, hitya, hina.

(xix) Form derived from the root Aras :
hrasa.
(xx) Other relevent terms :

agra (remainder, residue), antara (difference).

3. Multiplication ( x )

The terms denoting the operation of multiplication are derived
from the roots as (with prefix abhi; to repeat, to heap one upon
another, to multiply), ksud (to tread, trample down, strike against,
crush under the feet, to pound down), gua (to multiply), tad (to beat
or strike), vrj (to hurt, injure or kill), vyt (with prefix ut), and han
(to kill). The following forms have been used by Bhaskara I.

(i) Forms derived from the root as :

abhyasta, abhyasya, abhyasa, samabhyasta, samabhyasya. °

(ii) Forms derived from the root ksud :
ksunna, samnksunna.

(iii) Forms derived from the root gun :
guna, gunaka, gunakara, gunand, gunayitva, gunayet,
gunita, gunya, gunyate, gunyal, gunyal, sanguna,
sangunayya, sanguna, sangunita, sangunah sangunya,.

(iv) Forms derived from the root tad :

abhitadita, tadita.
(v) Form derived from the root vyj :
samyarga.)

(vi) Form derived from the root vyt :

udvartana.

on

 

1. Bhattotpala (in his comm. on Brhajjataka, vii. 13) uses the
word yargana in the sense of multiplication.

--- Page 465 ---
344

APPENDIX IIL

(vii) Forms derived from the root han:

abhinighna, abhihata, abhihatya, ahata, ahatya,
ahanyat, ghata, ghna, nighna, nihata, nihatya, prani-
ghna, pranihatya, visarnhati, samhati, samhatya, satnha-
nyat, samahata, hata, hatatn krtva, hatih, hatva.

4. Division ( — )

The terms used to denote the operation of division are derived

from the roots khand (to break), chid (to cut, to break asunder, to
divide), bhaj (to distribute, to divide), bhaiij (to break to pieces, to
split), vrt (with prefix apa), and hr (to take away, to divide). The
following forms have been used by Bhaskara I :

(i) Form derived from the root khand :
khandyat.
(ii) Forms derived from the root chid :
chitva, chidyate, chindyat, cheda, chedya, samncheda.
(iii) Forms derived from the root bhaj :
pravibhajet, bhakta, bhakte, bhaktavya, bhaktva, bhajana,
bhajita, bhajet, bhaga, bhagahara, bhage hrte, bhajayet,
bhajita, bhajyam, bhajya, bhajya, vibhakta, vibhajet,
vibhajeta, vibhajya, vibhajyate, vibhajita, vibhajayet.
(iv) Form derived from the root bhavij :
bhankiva.
(v) Form derived from the root yrt :
apavartana.
(vi) Forms the derived from the root hr :
apahyta, aharet, uddhrta, upahara, vihyia, samharet,
samhytam, samhyta, samhrta, samahrta, samuddhrta,
haratu, haret, hartavya, hyta, hrti, hte, hytva,
hriyate, hriyamdana.

Square

Terms used : krti, yava, varga, vargitam, vargana.

Square root

Terms used : dvigatamila, pada, mula, vargamala,

Cube

Terms used : ghana, trigata, yrnda, sadrsatrayabhyasa.

Cube root

Terms used : ghanamnla, trigatamala.

--- Page 466 ---
APPENDIX

IV

AUTHORITIES CITED BY BHASKARA
IN THE ARYABHATIYA-BHASYA

[ Note: Numbers refer to pages. ]

Amrytabindu-upanisad, 2, 4

Anye (Other scholars), 5, 9;
60, 87, 139, 172, 212, 214, 259,
See also : Kecit.

Apastamba-Srauta-stitra, 16
Arthasastra, 5, 45, 206
Aryabhata, 1, 5, 126, 189, 201,
202. See also under ASmaka.
Aryabhatiyam : See Asmakasya
ganitam, Asmakiyam, Bhata-

$astra, Bhatatantra, Gitika,
Svatantrantara —
Aryabhatiyah (=followers of

Aryabhata I), 88
ASmaka (Aryabhata I, 148, 155
Asmakasya genitam, 138

Asmakiya (=follower of Arya-
bhata I, 146

Asmakiyam ( = Aryabhatiyam),
140, 147, 148

Astadhyayi (of Panini), 3, 8, 9,
23, 55, 63, 125, 218

Asvagiksa, 17

Bhagavadgita, 24, 198

Bhartrhari-niti-Sataka, 222

Bhata-Sastra. (= Aryabhatiya),
137

Bhata-tantra (== Aryabhatiya),
121

Brhadaranyaka-upanisad, 12

ato AT ¥e

 

345

Manusmrii,

Ganita (a work on mathematics),
135

Garga, 178

Gitika, 187, 199, 202, 245, 247,
249

Hasti-siksa-vid, 17

Horda-ststra, 173, 174

Karmanibandha (= Maha-Bhas-
kariya), 40, 131, 203, 204, 205,
225. See also: Maha-Bhas-
Kariya.

Katydyana-srauta-stra, 16

Kautilya, 5, 45

Kecit (=Some scholars), 5, 9, -
55, 87, 88, 172, 174, 215, 249,
See also : ,

Latadeva, 183, 187, 189, 202

Maha-Bhaskariya, 33, 131, 179,
204, 226. See also Karma-
nibandha.

Anye.

15, 16, 24, 25, 30,
215
Maskari, 7, 67

Mudgala, 7

Nirukta, 14, 257

Niganku, 202

Panini’s Grammar, 10. See also
Astadhyayi

Paniniya-dhatupatha, 209

--- Page 467 ---
346 APPENDIX IV

Paniniya-Siksa, 14

Panduranga-svami, 202

Pardsara, 11

Paroskara-grhya-sitra, 15, 16;
—parisistakara-bhasya, 16

Pataiijala-Mahabhasya, 13, 22,
36, 37, 67, 72, 185, 188, 222,
231

Paulisa (=siddhanta), 46
Pauranika, 197, 198, 261
Prabhakara, 77, 84
Purana, 29, 261

Purana, 7, 67

Putana, 67
Ratna-pariksa, 257

Romakah (=followers of the
Romaka-siddhanta), 183, 186,
202

Romaka(-siddhanta), 46
Sahasraksara, 206

Sakendra, 206

Samhitakara, 185, 188, 189, 206
Sastrantara, 205

Satapatha(-brahmana), 12, 16.
208

’

 

Saugatah, 258

Saurya(-siddhanta), 46

Sitnharaja, 266, 207

Smrti, 208

Sphujidhvaja Yavaneévara, 215,
218

Sruti, 14, 207

Sugatamatavalambinah, (=follo-
wers of the Buddha), 212

Svatantrantara ( = Dasagitika-
sutra), 188

Svayambhuva-siddhanta, 45, 46

Taittiriya-brahmana, 16

Taittiriya-samhita, 183, 258

V Gjasaneya-samnhita, 257

Vakyapadiyam, 22

Vasistha(-siddhanta), 46

Vayu-purana, 4

Vedanga, 13

Visa-tantra, 17

Vrddhah ( = old people who
preserve the tradition), 34

Yajiiavalkya-smrti, 15
Yavanegvara, 207

--- Page 468 ---
APPENDIX V

QUOTATIONS IN THE ARYABHATIYA-BHASYA
{ Note: Numbers refer to pages. ]

(a) From Mathematical and Astrouomical literature

aaa @ ai, 49
wracneat afaaga, 211
aaleraresfacsr’:, 182
wea Release, 212
HAVA AA, 198
anfacagaga-, 215
AMANITA, 174
rgraye star, 73
wafa aferseta, 209
safe @ armgrta, 135
alafe a aaao =, 184
RANACTA: TATA: 233
saa: farferzaaza-, 184
wzifafesa-, 192
meee, 67
RTT: Tred, 44
wera areqaarafeafagam:, 200
agiasiteragy, 217
AgarAaaanaa, 206, 207
aafaarat qa, 200
waraTamcidgia:, 74
aeafte: maw, 77
aeatay fangz-, 183
ae a Ghost a, 185
antgerratex:, 187, 189
AVATAR waatart:, 179
mary qeafrya, 40

 

347

NAR araaqeaiy, 205
sfaaesaeatiy, 225
wT Ufain: Kat a, 176
ARTA, 183
aeatfariga wa, 40
agfaaferatat, 204

ara g yrasfagenaga, 207
anetaqieanad, 185
ufenrqafa aera, 181, 189
att qaqa facat, 33
thastfearaaisat:, 204
wy aRHTAT, 206

Ra: AgaAEA-, 203

aay GaRaaHT-, 203
agaatfaarstate, 183
AMATGAAAT, 184
faadwarrzaya-, 72
fafaezternrata-, 19
saradad facat, 61
aatatat yrartaft, 43
Aaa ATarar, 188
aaa weTAAT:, 203
acaeat faaaren:, 204
aneafiaid, 56
qatsfianay aita:, 250
ATT FULT sey stat, 129

--- Page 469 ---
8

APPENDIX V

(b) From Non.Mathematical literature

REIN Wee, 18
apefrastitar: wesat:, 14
aetfraratandeacfit:, 11
aU seartTHA, 16
ears sa Kata, 16, 208
afa a: @ Ee ware, 16
ufrarat taat ged, 17
areal earatia anita, 14
meted aMtTAR, 215
wavateira, 183

BETA sIgTAT TT, 15
sararatfa & Zar:, 22

ge va fe qarar, 2

ga nega frag erat, 15
wet gf Aaraxed, 207
srenfag arent, 3
stan famearg, 17
gfanreafianratita, 16
wifzeda Ga uIEd, 45
fasta a, 9

aenaig: agartiy, 25
araenamafera, 125
amarante aa fe ae, 3
AEATA TENT farsareei, 13
aeaet tiereaerrd, 257
anwgTATTGET, 35

fand wageasaind, 206
fag fagazfeg, 15

ava: a Rarfanoy, 218
a ant: qa wee, 7
waidtetarareai ara, 16

ard att are: 222
qreigfafirnearaa:, 14

& were) afer, 4

aaa gferat srg, 17

afr gaaadamfante, 8

a waaterta, 14

a gtaarat wigaiae, 49
amet eeeat aa, 15
Aetaterararfaed, 30

vafeaxy faadt 4, 17

qa: cH, 218

aay oy Farag, 218

afsasar dacat daraz, 16
Qwenret Ia atat, 12

alae <Uferai, 16

mat: fagat: fre fazrstat, 218
Tay arawet, 63

saata sense fat, 34
Heya aoraat Ate, 208
arr az aa alte, 4, 233
aria areragaaay, 257
qategedt aeggaTay:, 55
asat: atafia, 35

ayea alaya, 183

ATE ATA, 209

arate axaed frafe gaftraed, 233
aze: Tat aaa, 15

aisat amrazatarareat, 16, 208
wHenTaaeaaaer: Tals, 36
wratgrafaraceg, 23

wey froregrfasatal, 55
aay AHA, 183

--- Page 470 ---
QUOTATIONS 349

sareaaat fatranfaafe:, 72, 222
aefa aaaaa awa, 183

Miers Feat: TATA, 67, 185, 188
yeaatyzsormTred, 182

‘aq faserearfa, 18

aat gat faaratara, 23
agagraaaaeya, 24, 198
arareardlaara, 55, 248

at afa aw a acta, 15
gurenladd, 5
qavicaaarainraaad, 174
ggem: qaziea:, 257
Arsaaaist sitqedt:, 208

eq VF WeAeTI MSTA, 8
carat aaferefa Ufgeat a, 15

--- Page 471 ---
APPENDIX VI

GEOGRAPHICAL REFERENCES MADE BY BHASKARA
IN THE ARYABHATIYA-BHASYA

{ Note: Numbers refer to pages. ]

Gangadvara (Haradvara), 29

Harukaccha, 131

Jambudvipa, 29

Kulaparvata, 29

Kumari, 29

Kuru, 29

Kusumapura, (modern Patna),
45, 46. See also Pataliputra

Lanka, 13, 23, 24, 26, 29, 95, 96,
187,200, 202, 206, 236, 260-63,
265, 267

Magadha, 206

Mandara (Meru or North Pole),
212

Meru (North Pole), 30, 212, 261,
262, 263

 

Parasava (Persia), 29

Pgtaliputra (modern Patna), 45.
See also Kusumapura.

Rohana (South Ceylon), 13

Romaka, 262

Siddhapura, 262

Sinhala, 13

Sivabhagapura, 131, 132

Sthanesvara, 95, 96, 263

Surastra (modern Saurastra or
Kathiawar), 206, 207

Ujjayint (modern Ujjain), 29,
95, 263

Valabhi, 131

Yamakoti, 262

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES IN SOMESVARA’S COMMENTARY

Cakorapura, 263
Cattasiva, 263

Dagapura (=Mandasor in Madhya

Pradesh), 263
Malavanagara ({ ==Nagara or
Karkotanagara in Tonk
District, Rajasthan }, 263

Puskara-dvipa, 261

Vatsya-gulma (modern Baism in
Akola District, Maharastra,
about 70 km, south of Akola),
263

--- Page 472 ---
Numeral

10
1
12
13

APPENDIX VII

WORD-NUMERALS USED BY BHASKARA

Word-numeral

AST, ARAL, ATH, G, Wa, a, gor, fag, faaa, fagraa,
eater, Ya |

ATAGAAS, TF, TSI, aa, wes, aw, Maree, faa,
mime, =I, ames, aft, afar, eitafeo, staf,
Matz, garage, faaiq |

afraq, 7a, 74a, Aa, TH, aT, WH, TAA, ATA |

afta, BAY, YN, Wa, Was, gear, wa, ate, af, faxa,
facoan, fafa, gate 1

afea, aegitag, ardifa, arantara, safe, ga, wae, safer,
qT, Faq, AIG, TTT |

aa, wa, saa, eg, areata, art, ac, faa, az, fareitga,
aaa |

ag, I, wa

aa, raat, afk, fe, feria, ferfeqa, attoteae, eatya, fafe,
ara, fafaaz, oalat, aT, da, Tez, Aq, Aatea, gh,
farileaa, aa, FTI

FOAL, TT, art, wean, cHla, YT, YAR, ATA, 47 1
TE, far, wea, Te

ara, ayH, faa, gefe 1

Wa, ea, fz)

aa, 4, favata, ac, aren, xfa, qt i
faze |

351

--- Page 473 ---
$42

Numeral
14
15
16
{7 -
18
20
Li-
24
25
27
30
32

48
49 -

APPENDIX VII
Word-numeral
wy, ws, Teas
fafa, faa )
able M2
aria, aft, afrs  3tcteee ( 24)
Sree
faa, easy: |
aTa I
Ma, ANA, 7 I

fafa 1

eT

GeHIT |

ata

--- Page 474 ---
APPENDIX VIII

INDEX-GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL TERMS
USED IN ARYABHATIYA.BHASYA

[ Note : Numbers refer to pages. ]

aim (1 degree ; 2. numerator of
a fraction)

aim (1. same as 31); (2. used
for the astrological term
aaaia or vata, ie., 9th
part of a sign), 137

aqaaa (a variety of yuddha or
war of two
which occurs when the dis-
tance between their centres

star-planets,

slightly exceeds the sum of
their semi-diameters, and
there is ‘encounter of rays’),
235

aet (latitude), 13, 45, 95, 191,
242-44, 249, 254, 263, 266,
269, 281

aasat (Rsine of latitude), 89, 90,
266, 270, 276, 281

aaa (degrees of latitude), 242,
268, 274

seataata (deflection due to lati-
tude), 281

aatterfa (latitude, /if. inclination
of the Earth’s axis or eleva-
tion of the celestial pole),
29, 261

Alo Ato VY

353

aq (1. tip or end); (2, residue or
remainder), 132; (3. num-
ber), 135; (4. agra)

aafaat (distance between tips or
ends), 93

Ha (amplitude at rising, or the

Rsine thereof), 255, 266,
270

HAArat (residue-difference), 132,
134, 137, 152, 155

Waa (non-cube), 7, 53

aR_wH (Mars), 177, 213, 215,
236

aifgxt (Jupiter), 181, 209

amt (1. sign Aries), 187, 269;
(2. naksatra Purva-Bhadra-
pada), 205

afters (full retrograde; a planet
at an elongation of 180°
from the sun), 217

afr (=-afirrara), 185, 189

afieara (—aferata), 195

afaatae (greater remainder), 132,
155

afapimega (divisor correspond-

ing to greater remainder),
132, 133, 135, 155

--- Page 475 ---
354 APPENDIX VIII

afesrnmgr ( = afirntrede),
132, 133, 135, 150, 151,
153-55

afaata (intercalary month), 191,
193-95

afamiae (—srferata), 191, 194

aeeafers (lower cross ; nadir),
241

aeaulfasaa ( right-angled
triangle ), 97

aqgied (=agas), 217

waeatta (direct or anticlockwise),
215, 217, 218, 226, 227

ayatatle (direct motion); 220-22,
260, 279

agelafaaz (distance between two

planets in direct motion),
129, 130, 132

agae (re-retrograde ; commence-
ment of direct motion after
retrograde motion), 217,
219

agyawt (a planet which comm-
ences moving directly after

its retrograde motion ends),
221

araea (= aRIT, or AKITA)
106, 108, 112
wraaqd (last term), 49

aan (maximum correction),
223, 227, 231
aqeA (declination), 31, 32, 179,

241, 247, 254, 266, 269,
270, 277

 

RaBAHS (declination-arc), 241,
268

ATEATAIT (degrees of declination),
245, 246, 274

AIFAAIST (ecliptic), 32, 235,
241-47

aqaq (decrease), 43, 44, 124, 259

ase (—ATHAAVEA), 32, 241,
243-45, 281

aazeafeas (western cross ; west
cardinal point), 241

aaa (abrader), 144, 152
aradasya (==aqadz), 149
aqatqt (a designation of the

second half of the yuga),
199-201

aqasg (anticlockwise), 235, 264

ssaq (lord of the year), 204

weatfira ( ==s1s2q), 215

AFATA (multiplication), 66, 70

wATaIzaT (new moon day), 251,

. 265

a4aaq (northward or southward
motion of a planet), 176,

179, 182-84, 188, 276, 280;
(declination), 281

waanfa (solstitial motion), 183

aaa (deflection due to decli-
nation), 281

aeisat (Fat), 97, 98, 100, 102

weeafeaia (right-angled triangle),
98

--- Page 476 ---
GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL TERMS 355

aeifaeazt (radius), 280, 281

melaaagqzada §—(_ right-angled
triangle), 279

AaAMENe (arrow of intercepted
arc), 104

aaafr (=afa), 261; (difference
between the natis of the
Sun and Moon), 275;
(=eefaeia), 275

waa (omitted tithi), 185, 189,
191-95, 204

RaAAMa (omitted rithi), 191

warANy (residue of the omitted
tithis), 195

aaiteatat (even place), 9, 10, 19

waata (1. the vertical side of a
right-angled triangle), 90 ;
(2. plumb), 87; (3. Rsine
of co-latitude), 268

wamrag (aaa), 55-57, 59,
63-65, 68, 79, 85, 87-90,
256, 268, 269 etc.

afafitse (obtained by the process
of iteration), 252, 253

afafarsesot (hypotenuse obtained

by the process of iteration),
224

afatra (absence of difference ;

same as afafitez), 252-54

affaires (process of iteration),
225, 229, 253

afatrrrand (process repeated
until the successive results
show no difference; pro-
cess of iteration), 254

araye (month of Agvina), 180

afaa (un-illuminated part), 255

afaanta (measure of un-illumi-
nated part), 255

ReAAA (setting, diurnal or helia-
cal), 12, 217, 247-49, 262

weanalaays (rising-setting line),
272, 273

arantt (setting point of the
ecliptic), 256

‘weit (number of days elapsed

since some epoch), 20,
137-45, 147-52, 190-92,
202-5, 211

Hgranrwem (day circle), 242

wateratedfaensa (day radius), 269

AAMT: (= ae), 143-48

aaBraTsFeat (boundary of the sky.
According to Aryabhata I, it
is equal to 12474720576000
yojanas), 26, 211

ara (south-east direction, pre-
sided over by Agni), 103

aife or afar (first term), 105,
106, 108, 112

atfacaag (solar year), 210

argzarnet (light half of a lunar
month), 15

aq (naksatra Plirvasidha), 206

atarat (segment of the base by
the altitude), 56. (The usual
term is Hae)

--- Page 477 ---
356 APPENDIX VIII

BTaeaTeMe (used in the sense of
aratar or wae), 57

araerageey (rectangle), 48, 66-69,
72, 74, 97

sary (length or breadth), 44,
48, 63-64, 66, 68-69, 72, 88

ants (Saturn), 211

ure (sidereal), 174

aait (sidereal), 174

tad (= wT), 187

eT (= FegAT or requisition,
one of the three quantities
in the rule of three), 116

eae (fruit corresponding to
eat), 115, 116

Feit (—=FeET, requisition),
115, 116, 117, 120

FgrsTsH (sidereal revolation of
the Moon), 187

= (month of Agvina), 183

sea (mandocca or Ssighrocca),
179, 217, 227, 230, 285

ssamaafetit (epicycle), 220

ssatiagftad (anomalistic revo-
lutions), 179

eaitage (epicycle), 219, 227

yeaattad (= seattaafead), 179

BFTATH (anomalistic revolutions),
179

FATT (period in complete years
in which the maondocca of
a planet makes the mini-

 

mum number of complete
sidereal revolutions round
the Earth), 36

see (=H), 27, 175

TST (Moon), 192

STRUTT (—= eS), 41

weansitat (= senavm), 277

sewrvat (Rversed sine), 251, 281

seway (= gsewreat), 277

3a (common difference), 105,
106-9

same (hemisphere lying north
of the equator), 124, 266

saveafeae (northern cross :
north cardinal point), 242

SATAN (Sun’s northward journey
from winter solstice to
summer solstice), 182

watait (a designation of the
first half of the yuga),
199-201

SMAT (=TaAtAM), 15, 183

Seasitat (= seavat), 274

weavat (Rsine of the amplitude
of the rising point of the
ecliptic), 256

saat (rising point of the
ecliptic), 186, 253-55

SWAMI] (—TITTAT » 255, 274

weateasat (Rsine of the ampli-
tude of the rising or setting
Point of the ecliptic), 256

--- Page 478 ---
GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL TERMS 257

yearmra = (heliacal rising and
setting), 248, 260, 261, 264,
265

wadat (multiplication), 49
seravat (Rsine of altitude), 274

ymanry (degrees of altitude),
273, 274

Braqvsaq (equatorial horizon ; Six
o’clock circle), 242, 243,
266, 270

yreiterst (emersion), 282
STAT (increase), 138, 191, 192

TTAANIT (the
pulveriser), 143

additive in a

safafet (a series in general), 109
TaAtecaTyT (penultimate term), 106
Beat (meteor), 184

BMT (divisor corresponding
to smaller remainder), 133,
137, 152, 155

FMTATETE ( = HarTeyz), 132,
133, 135, 137, 151, 153, 154
3H (month of Kartika), 183
aa (1. asterism); (2. number 27),
158; (3. sign), 141
MAA (=a), 175
GRemTad (unit subtractive ),
137-39
gReaTay (unit additive), 143
THM (reduction to common
end-points), 200

 

VeTTW (unit subtractive), 137

gerrg ( = gereay), 139-43,
146-49, 153, 154

te (naksatra Jyestha), 206

titafae (relating to sunrise day-
reckoning), 194

eat (orbit), 201, 210, 212, 213,
216, 234, 236, 242, 258, 259

weayfaaesa (eccentric), 215, 216

Rest (mean orbit, deferent,
or concentric), 219, 221,
223, 224, 226, 227, 230-32

Barat (hemisphere), 29

witits (surd), 59, 72

met (surd), 44

seatafeed (operation of surds),
44, 45

mertsetT (addition of surds),
73

wTOAATH (addition of surds), 74

wftaraata (tusk-shaped figure),
70

we (sign Cancer), 270

weezy (1. sign Cancer ; 2. a pair
of compasses), 78, 85, 279

St (1. hypotenuse ; 2. lateral
side), 44, 56-59, 66, 72, 78-
83, 85, 90, 96-99, 217, 224,
227, 230, 231, 234, 255,256,
269, 279, 280

SAGA (hypotenuse-line), 86

" (a unit of measure, equal to
16 masakas), 117

--- Page 479 ---
353 : APPENDIX VIII

wat (1. minute of arc), 41;
(2. fraction)

warden: (the 24 Rsine-diffe-
rences in terms of minutes),
41

FANT (residue of minutes)

wea (reduction of fractions
to a common denominator),
122

#fa (—sfaam)

wfearengit (ahargana reckoned
since the beginning of Kali-
yuga), 177, 179, 180, 203

afagt (designation of a smaller
yuga, which commenced
on Feb. 18, B.C. 3102, at
sunrise at Lanka), 197, 198,

202
efagaragit (ahargana reckoned
from the beginning of

Kaliyuga), 26

sfrqmaia ( = sfrareagin),
202

®eT (a period of 1008 yugas,
according to Aryabhata D,
24, 26

wreaTART (—sraie), 248

wtagiet (hour), 214, 215

wtette (degree of time; one
hour is equal to 15 degrees
of time), 248, 249. The
kalamsa is a degree of the
equator,

BtwsS (1. arc ; 2. elemental arc),
79-81, 85, 124, 217, 222-25,
230, 246, 266, 272

 

wresvatT (Rsines of 24 elemental
arcs), 79-81, 227

BItsraTs (= wissvaT), 80

wiesgearsat (Rsine of 225’ which
is equal to its arc), 77

até (a day of Brahma, known as
‘Kalpa’), 24

wat (Mars), 45, 214, 224, 228,
230, 245, 246

*ESTHT (pulveriser), 5, 6, 44,
132-56, 177, 195, 196, 200

Set (a unit of “measure, equal
to 4 setikas), 121, 122

gfeaa (terrestrial or civil days,
measured from one sunrise
to the next), 20

ENT (rotations of the Earth),
19, 187

Hentz (sign Cancer), 182

Harygseat (the outer periphery
of the wind surrounding
the Earth, i.e, of the
Earth’s atmosphere, Accor-
ding to Aryabhata I, it is
equal to 3375 yojanas),
39 ff.

ga (—FaaT), 197

ex (1. anomaly), 179, 201, 218;
(2. centre), 88, 279

pera ies
180

wert (—iezqfes), 180

(anomalistic motion),

--- Page 480 ---
GLOSSARY Of TECHNICAL TERMS 389

wife (1. the vertical side of a
right-angled triangle; 2.
complement of the bhuja),
44, 80-82, 96, 98, 217, 223,
227, 229, 230, 255, 256,
269, 279

wifear (=arfe), 227

wtfesat (Rosine of bhuja), 223,
224, 227

a@tfzeat (correction for the koti),
38, 230

aifearat (—aAfena)

wtat (—=arfz), 93, 94, 96, 97

att (Saturn), 245, 247

wage (= FAVA or FAT), 41

eAsaT (Fat), 228

staffer (saagrz), (determinations
pertaining
timber), 6

ft (declination), 265, 273,
281

to sawing of

wibaaaa (aaaaea), 281
fea (sign Aries)

fafitsgrat (Earth’s shadow), 244,
245

fatfast (horizon ), 255, 256,
264-66, 270-72

fatasacza ( —fafas ), 237,
241-43, 256, 265, 272

fiafarrt (—fafervar), 270

farfasat (earthsine),
271, 272

124, 266,

 

aa (= wate), 210

atanfna (geometry and mensu-
ration), 5, 240

aana (area), 54, 56, 69, 70, 77

aig (= fasta), 124

aaeqr (=areineat), 27, 28,
152, 211

ala (sphere of the sky), 27,
242, 243, 265

avsaey (partial eclipse), 282

aAeq (middle of the sky, meri-
dian), 258; (zenith), 266,
268

@ta( eaagit ) ( determinations

pertaining to excavation),
6,7

5 (number of terms), 105-11

weggqa (sum of a specified
number of terms of a
series), 105, 108, 109, 125

aftta (mathematics), 1, 2, 5, 13,
43, 45, 64

afian (calculation), 12

Tax (exponent, power, multipli-

cation of equal numbers),
43

nfa (motion), 12, 13, 245
MeTAT (motion-difference), 279,
283, 285

Tat (a unit of measure, com-
monly known as ‘ratti’),
118

--- Page 481 ---
360 APPENDIX VIL

yer (= sat), 156, 157, 162-65,
167-70
qT (multiplier), 158

* TTT (multiplier), 92, 113, 116,
117, 120, 122, 124, 139,
144, 148, 157-66, 173, 191
193, 194, 196

’

TAT (multiplication), 43, 165, 168

"a (multiplicand), 161-64, 166,
168

gferat (shot ; a thing of unknown
value), 127-29

TZ (sign)

att (1. sphere: 2. celestial
sphere; 3. circle), 1, 2, 5,
29, 42, 43, 45, 240, 243,
248, 255, 265, 269, 281

wae (=e), 77, 261
MAH, 268

WEFTETHTT (planetary pulveriser),
136, 143, 144

agez (sce MBh, i. 29-30), 210

WET (eclipse), 12

wegfa (conjunction of planets),
12

wert (eclipse), 214

ara (measure of eclipse), 103,
104, 105, 280

WEF (eclipsing body), 104, 277,
279-282

mI (eclipsed body), 104, 279,
281, 282

 

afrat (1. a unit of time equal to
24 minutes; 2. a vessel
used for measuring time),
174, 266

afesaa(instrument for knowing
time in terms of ghatikas
etc.), 285

Hat (=afeat), 13

mA (cube), 7, 44, 50, 51, 33, 54,
109

aarfira( = sane), 58, 61

TATITTT (volume
sphere), 61, 62

aafaft (a series of cubes of
natural numbers), 111

of solid

aafafaaa (a solid representing
a series of cubes of natural
numbers ; the sum of a
series of cubes of natural
numbers), 110, 112

aagited (operation of cubing),
30

waqneq (Earth’s centre), 219,
223, 230

WAKe (cube root), 53, 54

a (circle, cycle), 145, 240

@JzA (quadrilateral), 63, 86

@ZTAATT (cube), 111

aqua (—agest), 68,77, 78, 81,
82, 85, 86

@aat (a period of 43,20,000
years, comprising of 4

yugas known as Krta, Treta
Dvapara and Kali), 179

--- Page 482 ---
GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL TERMS 361

‘SRIRT (lunar eclipse), 13, 282

a@taq  (ascensional difference),
237, 266, 270 etc.

azaaed (correction for the

Sun’s ascensional difference),
237

MTN (prdnas of ascensional _

difference), 124, 270

“aztd (ascensional difference ),
266

avg (arc), 225
AIX (motion), 215

fafa (1. pile ; 2..sum of a series
of natural numbers), 6, 7,
110

fafaaa (—agaat-agaar), 109
fafaat (square of the sum of a

series of natural numbers),
110

fafaagaat (sum of a series of
natural numbers), 112

grax (eclipsing body), 279

wr (eclipsed body), 279

grat (i. shadow ; 2. Rsine of
zenith. distance), 5, 87-96,
174, 250, 251

garter (length of Earth’s
shadow), 278

@z (denominator), 31, 50, 53,
116, 157, ete.

Raw (figure), 71

Bio Alo ¥y

afta (Jupiter), 144

ait (=e), 72, 73

w@ (Mercury), 142

“wat (Rsine, Le., RXsine), 38-41,

71, 74, 75, 77, 78, 80-83,
85, 217, 222, 227, 228 etc.

vate (== sat), 71, 78, 80, 84,
268-69

wifes (= was, circle of
asterisms), 12, 27, 40, 175,
188, 213, 215, 236, 237,
244, 255, 264

satfag (astronomy), 3, 12, 286

satfaataaray (astronomy), 13-15,
18

wef (heavenly bodies, lumi-
naries, stars, planets etc.),
264

aT (third of arc), 35

aq (1. of Earth’s
shadow-cone at the Moon’s

section

distance ), 278, 280;
(2, Moon’s ascending
node ), 202

wataa (section of Earth’s shadow-
cone at the Moon’s dis-
tance), 104

atts (star), 262

arcHag (—=ATTTIE), 196

a@zrmge = (star-planets, ie. the
planets Mars, Mercury,
Jupiter, Venus and Saturn),
236, 283

--- Page 483 ---
362 APPENDIX VIII

fafa (lunar date), 16, 29, 190

fafasaa ( =a, ie., omitted
tithi), 173

faeaet (end of new moon tithi
or full moon tithi), 283

TF (=ssa), 200

{at (sign Libra), 32, 241

@araeaz (sign Libra), 144

aif (sign Libra), 243

aay (a unit of linear measure),
173 .

fae3era = (the number which
yields the given remainders
when divided by the three
given divisors), 151

faqs (triangle), 48, 54, 55, 57,
68, 77, 78, 85, 99

faanaata (a trapezium with
three equal sides), 65

afe (a unit of time), 175

a@at (one of the four smaller
yugas), 25, 197

auf (rule of three), 18, 19,
27, 58, 59, 63, 89, 90, etc,

SANRCATHIT (a residual pulveriser

involving three residues),
154

sat (triangle), 55

eafst (triangle), 68, 71, 79

ratez (naksatra Citra), 206,

afaiaq (southward journey,
Sun’s motion from summer

solstice to winter solstice),
182, 183

 

 

afertit (southern hemisphere,
ie, hemisphere lying to
the south of the equator),
124, 266

afaritacasa (meridian), 241

afamtaztat (meridian), 263

ae (a unit of linear measure
equal to 4 cubits), 29, 32

ze (=satateat, new moon), 187

zat (half), 80

fer (=aeram7), 280, 281

fare (direction), 246

faart (seit), 137, 141, 153

faaq (lord of the day), 214

fared (noon)

faaafea (motion per day), 211

faazift (agi), 140, 145, 150

fearfeafa (—feaq), 214

feanafaa (sett), 138

feaarfera (= fara), 215

feea(an) (= aan), 210

feeaag (divine year, equal to 360

years Of men), 196

gat (designation of the first
and last quarters of a
yuga), 199-201

aaaiaq (ecliptic-zenith distance
or its Rsine), 31, 274, 275

qaetqaeea (vertical circle though

the central-ecliptic point),
267

--- Page 484 ---
GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL TERMS 263

amfa (arc of the ecliptic mea-

sured from the central

ecliptic point or its Rsine),
29

qmmfasat (Rsine of amfa), 274,
275

awitat (visible celestial sphere),

. 268, 269

qrsqt (Rsine of zenith distance),
29, 267, 272, 274, 275

aE (vertical circle), 267

ga (visible), 213

qraafzani (visibility corrections),
236

Zaagq (year of gods), 196

aemeaqrt (longitude ; distance of
the local place from prime
meridian), 13, 45, 191, 237,
249

QuractHa (correction for local
longitude), 24, 263

aureacztat (prime meridian), 24

aa (=a), 149, 189

aramtfex (cube), 50

avaz (one of the four smaller
yugas), 197

fqitat (increasing in the ratio
of 2), 77, 261

feeyeta. (a number which yields
the given remainders when
divided by the two given
divisors), 150, 155

 

 

feeBasdat (L.C.M. of the two
divisors), 144, 151

fgetaqia (descending node), 34

fgan(aaes) (trapezium with two
equal sides), 69

TUAHTETHTIT (pulveriser with two
given residues), 145, 150

fganeaet (isosceles triangle), 48

aa (designation of the second
compartment of the horo-
scope), 214

aq: (arc), 97

aaa (segment of a circle), 71,

72, 73

aftaa (sign Sagittarius), 142

eat (base), 64

fasoq (aera), 184

waterfa (elevation of the celestial
pole), 262

aata (star, asterism), 174, 208,
260

aaaneat (orbit of the asterisms),
28, 210

aaxae (was, circle of the
asterisms), 200

aavat (Rsine of zenith distance),
90

aawtt (degrees of zenith dis-
tance), 274

aaarisay (=aasat), 273

afa (parallax in latitude), 31,
236, 274

--- Page 485 ---
264

ewcafefa: (= arereneat), 210,
211

qwaant (=aante, a technical
term of astrology, meaning:
‘9th part of a sign’), 206,
207

aacifne (rule of nine), 116
aT. (a unit of linear measure,
equal to 4 cubits), 32

wata (sidereal), 31, 174, 181, 187,
189

atal (=ufear), 5

aretaveat (equator), 281

facta (immersion), 282.

fatafea (synodic period in days),
285

faragzzrare (non-residual pulve-
riser), 133, 135

fazaafaa (completely abraded);
138, 142, 144, 147, 148

xt (perigee or perihelion), 179,
217, 230

atagiad (= seatrarfead), 179

Tet (light or dark half of a lunar
month), 5

cafsgzfafa (4th, 6th, 8th, 9th,
12th, and 14th fithis), 17

qeaufe (—=asaefine), 115, 119

asazifire (rule of five), 116

qyq (drum-shaped musical

instrument), 70
quarsft (panava-shaped), 70

APPENDIX: VIII

qe-(1. square root); (2. quadrant
of a circle), 38-40; (3. terms
of a series), 105, 107,
109, 125

tTaaa (sum of a specified number
of terms of a series), 108

WAT (term-layers), 111

QT (west)

avatar (= atATeRT), 281

TTATTFA: (greatest. declination ;
obliquity’ of the ecliptic),
272, 277

Trad (round, cycle, revolution),..
177

afte (mathematical operation),
44

aftorg (1. periphery, circum:
ference), 60, 61, 71, 75;
(2. breadth), 121

afzfar (circumference), 60, 71, 72,
76, 79, 267

af<t®e (graphical representation),
250

aftadt (=a), 180

qa (=n), 13, 151

qa (ew moon’ or full moon),
185, 188, 190, 267

qa-(a:unit of measure, equal to
4 karsas), 117

Gta (ascending node), 23, 26, 33-
35,. 244+246, 275, 279

qiwd-(lateral side), 56,:63, 64, 66,
68, 70, 86:

--- Page 486 ---
GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL. TERMS 365

frqert (year of the manes), 196
faouad (= faqad), 197
dwera:(male asterisms), 15
qrisat (chord), 79

qafaz (prime vertical), 273
qataravedt (east-west circle), 241
qafactat (east-west line), 267

qaiqeata (directed east to west),
255

gus (= Jessa, surface area), 74,
15

yataseat (money contributed by
the partners), 119

sug (first contact in an eclipse),
282

sfaqrsaa (beginning.and end), 15
gfarese (eccentric), 201
¢

sfanvenae (distance of the
planet on the eccentric),
223, 224

sferqvgerna (operations pertaining
to the eccentric), 225

sfagqa (opposite), 69

sfivcrfra (set down separately),
40

sfasita (retrograde, clockwise),
215

gfasitanfa (retrograde or clock-
wise motion), 214

MATS: (verification), 67, 68

sanata (ascending node), 33-35

gdivegrarsa (lamp-and shadow
method), 90, 278:

 

sary (= saraztie), 12, 115, 116
saertrfer, (argument, one of the

three quantities in the rule
of three), 116, 117, 120

wagary (the provector wind), 12,
20, 40, 236, 260, 261
sagifaa (=sagatg), 260, 261
wee (= Hea, setting), 189
garatatat (gone to setting), 209

wea (a unit of measure equal to
4 kuduvas), 209

siwatatss (right ascension),
270

qT (== 4A), 267
sq (a unit of time equal to 4

sidereal seconds), 5, 174,
175, 253, 255, 267

sitesta (month of Bhidrapada),
180

wa or Safa (fruit, one of
three quantities in the rule
of three), 12, 117, 120

aTaTyG, 262, 264, 265

arata (a unit of length), 173

ang (=a), 55,79, 102, 254

age (= 41g), 80

gersg (Rsine of altitude), 292

weft (a day of Brahma; a
Kalpa), 197

agifeaa (= wetfer), 25, 197, 198,
259, 260

@ (=a), 205, 209

--- Page 487 ---
366 ‘ APPENDIX VIII

aim (asterisms,
number of
performed by a planet in
a yuga), 20, 21, 137, 140,
145, 146, 153, 174, 176, 177,
179, 180, 184, 194.96, 202,
210, 211, 218, 227, 237

revolutions,

watt (sphere of the asterisms,
with centre at the Earth’s
centre), 176, 264, 268, 269

Was (circle of the asterisms), 12,
20, 175, 186, 187, 260

WaT (revolutions of the aste-
risms, /.e., rotations of the
Earth), 187

WISHT (— WaT), 20, 258, 260,
261

wafeog (circumference of the
circle of asterisms), 210

aa (revolutions of the aster-
isms), 188

waa (sign), 140

waa (ecliptic), 256

wm (degree), 265, 266, 281

wiTgeeteie (degree-pulveriser),
140

MTA (quotient), 139

wT (residue of the degrees),
140

amet (= wMEIz), 92, 137-39

wartgtz (divisor), 116, 117, 120,
121 ete.

wisa (dividend), 135

revolutions ~

 

Wit (a unit of measure equal to
2000 palas), 117

wad (revolutions of thea ste-
risms), 181

aft (motion, daily motion), 178,
204, 236, 252, 253, 266

at (arcual distance from the
ucca or nica, whichever is
less), 78, 79, 94, 255

aasaqt (Rsine 6), 223-225, 227,
235, 246, 272

wat (=H), 44, 54, 55, 59, 78.
83, 90-98, 223, 227, 230,
255, 256, 269

WaATrATGa (bhujantara correction,
i.e., correction for the
equation of time due to the
eccentricity of the ecliptic),
237

WnsGe (equation of the centre),
38, 122, 229, 236, 237

& (base), 57

quta (Sphere of the Earth), 214,
258, 259, 260, 264

qegrar (Earth’s shadow), 244,
245, 278, 281

Wareragfaat (distance between
the Earth and a star planet),
28, 216, 234-36,

afaa (terrestrial day, or civil

” day), 152, 193, 195, 211

afeaa (="feA), 20, 26, 136, 139,
142, 144, 173, 185-87, 191-
194, 203

--- Page 488 ---
GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL TERMS 367

wafefa (circumference of the
Earth), 29

way (rotations of the Earth),
20, 21

qaan (Earth’s rotation), 260

af (base), 63

afage (Mars)

&z (a variety of yoga in. which a
smaller planet comes
between the observer and
the disc of a larger planet
and appears to pierce or
make a hole into the larger
planet), 235

wit (=afe), 279

aa (= s%eH, a pair of com-
passes), 85

ava (circle, revolution), 78, 137-
141, 145, 148, 150, 177, 195,
199, 200, 211-14, 223, 238,
240, 241, 244

AesaFeETHIT (revolution pulve-
riser), 138

wwaie (residue of the revo-
lutions), 137, 139, 145, 146,
153, 154, 195

afa (optional number), 132

aeegfaata (the fish-method for
drawing a perpendicular),
255

ereafatay (—=Areafaara), 279

ag (month of Caitra), 183

HeTSAaT (midday shadow), 254

aeasat (meridian sine, i.e., Rsine

of the zenith-distance of
the meridian: ecliptic point),
268, 274-76

neafafa (mean tithi), 275

weu(u) (middie term), 105

aewy (mean), 22, 193, 196, 211,
217, 222, 225, 226, 230-31,
233, 236

Reaatia (mean daily motion),
185, 198

meqAWE (mean planet), 211, 216,
224-26, 228, 232

asaafafa (mean tithi), 190

weTAT|] (meridian ecliptic point),
254, 268

Reargeagrat (midday shadow),
261

Wy (a period of time, equal to
72 yugas, according to
Aryabhata I), 24, 25

ad (slow, apogee of slow motion,
wealea), 22

wae (hypotenuse associated
with Azalea), 236

wzEA (manda-operation), 40

aretez (manda anomaly), 222,

228

weaaeana (manda correction,
equation of the centre),
228, 229

Hradtatea(qet) (manda epicycle),
234

--- Page 489 ---
368 APPENDIX Vill

aeat (Meru mountain), 212
waa (manda epicycle), 37, 227
Brzea (apogee or aphelion), 33,
35-40, 179, 215, 217, 218,
220, 222-34, 236
Araleaney (= AreRT), 234
ardteaars (= wraeeT), 224, 226
avaieavat (==HFahereaT), 222
aalsaqa (equation of the
centre), 229

AAT (="g), 24, 198

ngiveg (Rsine of altitude), 274

ngint (larger arrow), 100, 102-
103

Rel (base), 56

agate: (Jupiter), 146

arafagtar (east-west line), 231

arta (month of Vaisakha), 183

aimte (a unit of measure), 122

ataaare (half the sum of the
diameters of the eclipsed
and eclipsing bodies), 279-
83

mua (a unit of measure equal
to 5 gufijas), 118

aratfira (lord of the month), 215

faaa (sign Gemini), 32, 241,
266, 269, 270

fasta (sqagix), (determinations
pertaining to mixtures of
things), 5

vita (sign Pisces), 32, 241

 

ga@ (1. face, upper side facing
the base, 64, 69; 2. first

term in a series, 107)

aga (a unit of time, equal to 2
ghatis or 48 minutes), 118,
174, 176

gat (1. square root), 79, 80;
(2. principal), 114

YART (interest), 114

aaqfa (sign Leo), 137

Afadtgaas (Mars), 145

#% (mountain at the north pole),
30, 261-62, 265, 267

®q (sign Aries), 32, 241, 265,
269, 270 etc.

Hat (separation of the eclipsed
body from _ the : eclipsing
body), 279-83

alfes or atfent (minute of arc),
142

aa (nakgatra Bharani):205

aa (aunit of length, equal to
the thickness of a barley
corn), 173

afec-azq (an instrument for
astronomical observation),
"286

ara (a period of three hours ;
also called 8g), 176

areatat (meridian), 266

aredtacawea (meridian), 241,
266

--- Page 490 ---
GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL TERMS 369

areatazaat (directed north to
south), 255

araacy (squaring) 47

araarad (a quantity of unknown
value, x), 128, 267

gt (a period of 43,20,000 years),

5, 24, 25, 27, 116, 184, 185, —

199, 200, 208, 206, 209,
213; (a period of 5 years),
176

qq (quarter yuga), 198, 201,
202

gmat (number of civil days in
a yuga), 190

ga (a unit of linear measure),
173

att (conjunction of two planets),
176, 177

aaa (a unit of linear measure,
equal to 8000x4 cubits),
26

zarqy (a unit of linear measure),
173

zfawgm (solar eclipse), 281, 282
waaa (= afzae), 186
zifia (sign), 26, 165

ufit ( saagrz ) (determinations

pertaining to heaps of
corn), 6, 7
aifaafera (symbolical mathe-

matics), 44

Ao Ato vig

 

TWIATH Ta (times of risings of
the signs), 249

werent (= Tgeaeta), 249

zg (1. Moon’s ascending node),
104, 185, 202; (2. Eclipser),
212

fey (designation of the sixth
compartment of the horo-
scope), 214

wag (a coin), 117, 127

aa (rising point of the ecliptic),
268, 271

wgiat (times of risings of the
signs at Lanka, /.e., right
ascensions of the signs),
267-70

Alea SATS (tight ascen-
sion), 269

ast (quotient), 156-71

asacift (quotient), 167, 169, 170

aif (= saereifit), 162, 167

aran (plumb), 87, 96 ; (Rcosine
of latitude), 124, 270, 272,

276
araa (parallax in longitude, or
difference between the

parallaxes in longitude of
the Sun and Moon), 3],
214, 236, 261, 274, 278

ma (degree), 141

mw (quotient), 156, 159, 160,
162-68, 171

--- Page 491 ---
370 APPENDIX VIII

faart (a unit of linear measure),
173

facat (minute of arc), 21, 29, 31,
33 ete.

faftast (= facat), 29

a (retrograde), 217, 221, 248

a@at (a planet in retrograde
motion), 39, 130, 217

aaa (=9@, f.e., the upper side
of a quadrilateral facing the
base), 63

Pp

ai (odd place ; square), 7, 8, 10,
47, 51, 52, 79, 100, 103,
108, 113 ete,

awfafa (a series of squares of
natural numbers), 110

aifafaaa (a solid representing a
series of squares of natural
numbers ; the sum of a
series of squares of natural
numbers), 110

ait (squaring), 47

at (square root), 52, 87, 89

Tia_AAt (sum of a series of
squares of natural numbers),
110

aieqtt (odd place), 8-10, 19

agtfirt (lord of the year), 215

aaa (=aeaatT or AaaaAa),
280

wrasq (the north-west direction),
102

 

 

aresafa (commencement of the
succession of days), 215

araq (the naksatra Satabhisaj,
whose lord is Varuna), 17

ataq (naksatra Dhanistha, whose
lords are the Vasus), 205

fawtas (one-twentieth of a
rapaka), 117, 121

famet (second of arc), 141, 142
etc.

fafatca (having celestial latitude ;
deviated from the ecliptic),
248

faeta (celestial latitude), 32-34,
179, 235, 247, 250, 268,
274, 275, 277, 279, 230

fasiaavsa (the orbit of a planet,
usually called faavse), 241,
242, 245-47

faafat (one-sixtieth of a ghatika
or nadi), 173

faarfent (—faafzar), 174
faatet ( =faarfsat), 5, 173, 174

faqttaeay = (inverse —_ process,
method of inversion), 92,
124, 266

farttatfa (retrograde motion),
23, 222

fans (the orbit of a planet),
124, 268, 274

fawatd (half the duration of
totality of an eclipse), 279

--- Page 492 ---
GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL TERMS 371

faa (space illumined by the rays
of the Sun), 211

fafateat (second of arc), 144, 164

faferftant (= faferat), 157, 165

fasitana (rule of inversion), 124

fastafaat
planets, one direct and the
other retrograde), 129-31,
138

faaz (difference), 92, 263

(difference of two

faire (difference), 57, 90, 108,
256

fare (difference), 246, 279

fawn (odd), 68

fagaages (scalene quadrilateral),
65, 69

favafaaa (scalene triangle), 55,
56, 57

fanreas (= fasafrqa), 55

faqacata (—fauafaaa), 69

fagassitat (—asat), 268, 269,
272

fagasat (aatsat), 268, 269, 272,
273 .
fagaa (equator), 89, 95, 200,
241, 242, 244, 246, 255,

262, 266

faqaemot (hypotenuse of equi-
noctial midday
272, 274

shadow ),

faganeger (equator), 32, 244

 

 

facney (diameter), 60, 62, 71,
72, 75-77, 95, 98, 104, 278

facaeeted (semi-diameter, radius),
78, 80, 81, 83, 87, 88, 267

farat (1. length), 63 ; (2. dia-
meter), 276, 280

faeate (length), 44, 48, 66, 68,
69, 72

aa (1. circle), 68, 71, 85, 97;
(2. epicycle), 219, 220

qaeat (epicycle), 220, 221

qarentant (arrow of the arc of
a circle intercepted by an-
other circle), 103

afa (1. interest), 114, 115, 120,
‘121; (2. common diffe-
rence), 109

ara (cube), 46, 47, 50

aq (sign Taurus), 269, 270

qaa (=a), 270

aT (velocity), 27, 234, 235, 260

FATHTETHTT
147

(time pulveriser),

age (a variety of ae or eaditata

which occurs when the
sum of the longitudes of
the Sun and the Moon

amounts to 12 signs), 178

amatara (see LBh, ii. 29), 178,
179

eacaauifres (inverse rule of
three), 121, 124, 129, 130

--- Page 493 ---
372 APPENDIX VIII

sara (diameter), 76, 78

sataty (semi-diameter, radius),
79-82, 98, 122, 124, 216-19,
221, 223, 224, 225, 227,
229-31, 234-36, 246, 269,
281

wes (gnomon), 87-96, 124, 174,
256 ; (Rsine of altitude),
271, 272

wenatfe (complement of altitude,
zenith distance), 255

weaag (distance of the planet’s
projection on the plane of
the horizon from the rising-
setting line), 272

mt (arrow, Rversed sine), 79-83,
97-98, 100, 104, 105

attet (Sighrocca), 22, 214, 221,
224-26, 232

aitsaa (Sighra-operation), 40,
230, 232

sitsrea (Sighra-correction), 229

aitsraet (sighra-epicycle), 227

xftsitea (sighrocca), 36, 37, 39,
40, 179, 215-18, 220, 222,
224-28, 231-34, 236, 241,
245, 247

aitaieaed ( fighra-operation ),
231, 234

eitsieanfcler (sighra-epicycle), 38,
221, 224

wisteaea  (Sighra-correction),
231

 

whetteaqa (sighra-epicycle), 226

7a (the illuminated part of the
Moon’s disc; the phase
of the moon ), 251, 255,
257, 258

wraqet (the light half of a lunar
month), 252

geatfeara (A lunar month
reckoned from new moon),
207

gearaara (A lunar month rec-
koned from full moon), 207

gaat (exact division), 132, 133,
etc.

~Hteafa (elevation of the lunar
horns), 251, 255, 256

sat (series), 5, 6, 44, 105
sdinfoa (calculations pertaining
to series), 105

asfit (a solid with 6 edges, a
triangular pyramid), 58.

asfieta (regular hexagon), 71
daeat (year), 5, 172, 176, 180-
81, 188-89, 207, 209
dat (multiplication), 47-50, 54,

69, 97-98, 109-10, 112-13,
116, 204, 234, 236
deatz (the number 48), 164
ageaat (sum of a series of

natural numbers), 109

agaaarat (square of sankalana),
110

--- Page 494 ---
GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL TERMS 373

weseat-aeraat (sum of the
series 32m), 109, 110

ageam (addition, subtraction
and division by 2), 57, 103

eeat (dawn of a puga), 25, 197

acaztfae (rule of seven), 116,
121

eaerey (equation), 5, 127

anaget (square), 47, 48, 51, 79,
80

aasant (equilateral triangle), 68,
71

aneafix (equilateral triangle), 56,
71

aaqariet (altitude of a triangle),
54-57

auavea (prime vertical), 242,
266-67, 269 etc.

aaneeaeeat (prime
shadow), 90

aanwaresy (Rsine of prime
vertical altitude), 273

ater (1. equator), 32; (2. prime
meridian), 263

aare (sum), 57, 74, 104

aat: (year), 172, 180, 203-4

arama (half the sum of dia-
meters of the eclipsed and
eclipsing bodies), 235, 279,
282

asqrerrar (== Tatarat), 63, 65

- @eqraere (arrows of intercepted

arcs), 103, 104

vertical

 

 

ade (sum of a series), 105-8,
125, 126

aaviq (reduction to common
denominator), 122, 123

ata (clockwise), 232, 264

een (designation of third com-
partment of the horoscope),
214

atacaz (astronomer), 85, 87, 192,
240, 283

mTHEIATT (residual pulveriser),
133-34

arg (naksatra Aslesd), 183

ataa (civil), 31, 173, 186

araaata (civil measure), 186

araaara (civil month), 186, 187

faa (1. illuminated part of the
Moon, phase of the Moon),
251; (2. Venus), 214

faasart (—faaata), 256

faaata (=faa), 252, 255

farrgieafa (elevation of the
illuminated lunar horn),
257

ga (designation of the fifth
compartment of the horo-
scope), 214

grat (designation of the second
and third quarters of a
yuga), 199-201

qemat: (the number 24), 153

afz: (Jupiter), 36

quae (solar eclipse), 282

--- Page 495 ---
374 APPENDIX VIII

afanr (a unit of measure equal
to 4 manakas), 121, 122

atea (naksatra Mrgasira, whose
lord is Moon), 206

atz (solar), 31
atzata (solar measure), 184

fearad (half the duration of an
eclipse), 275, 279; (celestial
latitude), 281

eax (first contact in an eclipse),
279-83,

wg fa (true daily motion), 185,
217, 236

eEEMg (true planet), 216, 223,
224, 226, 232

eqzary (—=eRenfa), 220

eqefafa (true t7hi), 190

eazafar (-=egenfa), 178, 190,
221, 236, 238, 239, 286

eqzneaaaiad (true-mean motion),
221

 

ewefaeta ( celestial latitude as
corrected for parallax), 275,
279

wax (designation of the seventh
house of the horoscope),
214

eagMreqed (times of risings of
the signs at the local place,
oblique ascensions), 186,
252

eaqanat (perpendiculars drawn
on the base and the face
of a trapezium from the

point of intersection of the
diagonals), 63, 65

eafea® (cross), 240-43
fea (horizon), 266

fgae (designation of the fourth
compartment of the horos-
cope), 214

alta (lord of the hour), 214

glteat (= eta), 215

--- Page 496 ---
APPENDIX IX

INDEX OF HALF.VERSES AND KEY PASSAGES

aia: wateata (ta, 14c) 213
aaarg ang fealata
(afta, 5a) 53
aaatia aft aga (ma, 9c) 260
aasafeginarcagT
(afta, 33 a) 132
aaned AFAHAT
(afore, 13 d) 85
afanmegagy (afta, 33.c) 132
afaaraamar (afta, 32a) 132
aferrast gt & (aI, 6a) = 191
agatanfaater: (a, 9a) 260
ageatnfadad (ata, 20c) 220

aqeranft arta (1a, 21 a) 221
aracgad gta afaay

(afora, 24 c) 113
qaqa: tira fara

(afaa, 28 d) 124
aqnesaea ara: (Mla, 3a) 245
HATAT AAA (TA, 12c) 262
agagataeneneanarat

(afore, 10 c) 71
aretat gata feast

(ate, 30 d) 272
aaieq aosatd (tits, 2c) 244

awegtisiat firey (fast, 7b) 28

 

375

aatsha: (aa, 37 a) 277
adsarat: a ay agar:

(afora, 17 d) 97
ad waqqaeard (sta, 16c) 264
weiqn aa way Weg

(ata, 23 b) 232
adan ad wafa Ta

(ata, 22 d) 228
ag afacapa (Ma, 15 c) 263
aatfa cararé (ata, 5c) 250

acy fe avsaset: (wim, 14 a) 213
warsamtauig Bra Sat a:
(atfast, 2 b) 7
AMAA Feat: (HA, 4 d)180
aezlat aga (sta, 8 c) 197

wearaaagara (Ma, 29) 272

arated goaaegeara (wTe, 9 d)

199
aaraya aed (afta, 8a) 63
araucentoa vata (afta, 1c) 1
aaaetd arent (att, 50 a) 287

araat geraieong: (tt, 10 d)71

gee tai afar (afta, 19 a) 105
guginafaccad (afta, 19) 105
gtasatgtord (ma, 25 a) 269

gecrranginary (m4, 26a) 270

--- Page 497 ---
376 APPENDIX 1X

eszammast (ata, 24 a) 269

saat wear: (Me, 14 c) 263
wrataoht gard (#1, 9a) 199
sanqaaaaay (ma, 36 .c) 276
saafa fe amare: (ae, 27 a) 270
saaranafafra (sta, 10 a) 260
say aaraeaad (ma, 35c) 276
saat at agit (aa, 13a) 262
wae Hada (Mea, 19 c) 266
safeata aagt (wt, 13.c) 211

sweaaaaatia (afta, 6c) 58
HeaAAEATS AE: (MA, 21 a) 267

SCMTATAAAT: (BTA, 22 a) «228

aH Fam a aa a (Tita, 2a) 46
uarazaafaa: (afta, 21 a) 109
Ratat aeatat (Wa, 20c) 267
ua arafaam: (#1, 2 c) 174
uataara yfa: (atm, 15) 213

wearafanssant. (1a, 17 a) 215
seqmosagea (aI, 18a) 219
HearesTaa- (wT, 21c) 221
wearai want (wa, 25 c) 234
® aeai taal Tt wer

(wtfawt, 1 b) 1
&@ Fd: (afar, 7 b) 28
wareisar: (sitar, 12 d) 4t

wentdaatar: a (atfawt, 5c) 24

eraaeta qeafe wer:
(srs, 13 b) 211

 

Brasaaaaeat
(ata, 11 c) 205

wesag aNd (Ta, 22a) 268
Brat aaa s (atfast, 5a) =. 24
F fefegorcy sim (afar, 3 b)18
ga vafaaga (ati, 3d) 18
HAqVnyrad (ste, 3 c) 245
gfeadiag aga: (ata, 17d) 265
F_GIgEeatad Awa

(afaa, 1 d) 45

alzuqe a ard (nfita, 2c) 46
eaganaaa, (ata, 22a)  —-228
fafast aaataed (ata, 18 c) 265
fafastgeaartat (ata, 32 a) 273
fafas eat aaarat (aa, 34) 274
fafacfadima faapa

(ata 48 a) 283
aa krarreadar AAT
(ate, 2 d) 174

ersren ait Walt Foy:
(ata, 46 b) 282
afgaas caer aa (afat, 2c) 7

agnit veaat (wifaat, 6d) 26

T-§-8-E-G-A TaTAeT:

(aitfret, 10 b) = 37
TRANSAT ATT MATA

(afora, 20 a) 108
afad wtafeat ata

(aitfarat, 1 d) 1
wares @ (sitferet, 5 b) 24
TeaatT saat (afta, 31 c) 129

--- Page 498 ---
INDEX OF HALF-VERSES 377

meaternty TATITAT:

(7itfawt, 9 b) 33
fafaer yargneatreat

(ritfarnt, 11 d) 39
UHI wTTge: (afta, 28 a) 124
ye faega (sitfawt, 3 c) 18
qefaaarea areata aA

(attferat, 5 d) 24
qeanar afer: (*taT, 4c) 180
Yaareft afse: (ta, 2a) —:174

afrsrata fate (afta, 30 a)
127

aguTaaiveat (atfast, 13 c) 41
oretaatratset (afta, 18 c) 103
greta ¢ aa (afta, 18 a) —:103

gamawt faxarey

(atta, 7 d) 61
aataat gama: ena

(afera, 3 d) 50
aged at (atfaat, 8 d) 31

cafe faa gaa (atfaat, 12 c) 41

ageirs saacequ (afna, 10 a)71
aerearardiaed (ata, 42a) 279
aatea sufas (afew, 4 a) 21
aeat weatsfea: (ae, 37 a) 277
aaistgtanta: (vite, 4a) 247

graafa wait qa (ate, 37 c) 277
grargind grag (afora, 16 a) 93
erirraafaat (ae, 40a) 278

Wtdo Ato ve

Bayt avye (afta, 27 c) 122
Bar Teeaegat: (afora, 27 a) 116
Hl-O-FA-GA-HANTATT

(atfrat, 11 c) 39
sada facade witaiy

(ata, 23 b) 268
sal raha Tear (att, 30 c) 272
MN-TSAAT-A-TS TAT

(aitfarst, 10 c) 37
atatfa araae (aifast, 10 a) 37
fant qeqrat (West, 7a) =—-:28

aAVAGTN Aatara: (Ata, 14 a) 263
avafuarratese: (nite, 41 a) 279
seraasaratet: (afta, 12¢) 83
wea aresan: aa (ate, 48d) 283
adg AA Halse: .
(ta, 10d) 201
agla adaca: (ata, 7 c) 259
afasgaa ga (afta, 7c) =
aeneasatHeat: (stat, 33.c) 274
aye yea (afta, 25) 114
aaa: rafaonenq (ata, 40 d) 278
aval facweutd (Tra, 43a) 280
aremagegatat: (wat, 2 a) 244
ASHANTI F-4-ATTe:

(aifaet, 6 b) 26
ateatedtard (aa, 1 c) 243
fanfgaat waa a aTaey

(ata, 1 b) 172

--- Page 499 ---
378 APPENDIX Ix

faqued waerdtt (aft, 63) 54
faq a agdsi a suteng
(afera, 13 b) 85
safer fanfazeat: (ta, 10 c) 201
aufranatia (afore, 26a) 115

aaitfangaitad (safest, 13 a) 41
faageaaatiet (Ta, 8c) 259
feed adage (#Tat, 8 a) 197
facta aw:afeta (sta, 12c) 210
qaetqaosanta (ate, 21c) 267
Pavey (Te, 23 a) «268

Partrpiatanracs

(wa, 34 a) 274
qearsa ugg” (ata, 21 b)267
aar: eater ante

(wa, 16 a) 264
geet afery wag 8H
(as, 20 d) 267
at-atfa-at-gat-gea-faeq
avateay (aitfaat, 9d) 33
fesfaqona dantg (afore, 24 a) 113
faatrmreradtaedt (afore, 31 d) i29

wWaaaaey Hea (Ta, 11c) 261
ATHY ATATYS FT TeeeEy

(ata, 12 b) 262
waaay zaited: (ata, 4c) 247
fea saan atgar fara:

(mta, 10 b) 260
afea ats (cifras, 7 a) 28
qzaresrstat (Ta, 30a) —- 272
afta: agerrsat (afta, 9c) 71

 

| Weadaaeted (Ae, 22c) —-268-
j fet grangfnd (eta, 7c) 196

qatarfadar- (aa, 20 a) 267
qaistfarar (cite, 19 a) 266
qaiawaaned (ata, 18 a) 265
IEMA eT: (Ta, 46 a) —«-282
sfaadtanaiae (fast, 1 a) 1
afinesaafaat (ata, 19a) 103
Mfanosmea med (sta, 18 c) 219
sfaata da wteitsarq

(wIm, 17 d) 215
qaaToarTeqtaia (afta, 12 a) 83.
qaataTeaTeat (ate, 27 c) 270.
WAST agar fetca: (Ma, 10 b)260
TaeA IWR GH ATEATT:

(nftt,9b) 66
ara eae facegay
(ata, 21d) 267

sistaifar wert a (sitfaret, 6c) 26

& & waredvar: (sitet, 12d) 41
wat a aquTaed dai:
(afra, 3 b) 47

TATIFATS Vis 7-a-Ti-9-Z
(aitfarat, 9 a) 33
ga gyfaaa (atfaat, 4 b) 21

qaTAIMAaMey AGIA
(atifetet, 4 d) 23

gfaaq crafaetar (atin, 4 c)23
agegrfiqayrcfa- (afna, 1 a) 45 -
wafeaaa ya: (WA, 8a) 259

--- Page 500 ---
INDEX OF HALF-VERSES 379

wan feadt vagarna
(aT, 8 d) 197

waa faciafaart (afna, 31 a) 129
ITT HEMT (sta, 3a) —«176
“WIsat: aut wala
(mt, 10d) 260
wattse: (afar, 6 d) 26
wiTETed wafer Trae:
(afta, 28 b) 124
wet gtzanifeaed (afta, 4a) 52
waa: ASAT (HTH, 15 a) 213
writaieacarara (m4, 47) 283
saraaet agin: (afta, 8a) 31
wraatranfa atarat: (#1a, 5d) 181
watt: ada qe: (Tite, 6d) 258
qagaked wasat qa
(afer, 13.b) 41
auemat ataatta (ata, 5 a) 250
azaraat fawad (ata, 40 c) 278
AegRaATRaeT (Ma, 39 c) «278
qemrat gered (tH, 38 c) 277
ware faat eareey-
(wim, 25a) 234

afeaciarfeafasaar:

(Ta, 6d) 191
qufafaat fang (me, 39 a) 278
WIAs TI (Wea, 15 a) 263
qTeqaafaratar: (afte, 7c) 28
a wafage (aw, 4b) 21
wras a (sferat, 8 d) 31

awe

quake: (sitfast, 3 d) 18

 

afe fa sfe (sitar, 12a) 41
HoseTAcaneeata (HTH, 13 a) 211

afayorrarat fara
(afta, 32d) 132
Reasalaasitar- (we, 33a) 274

aearraatisay (ma, 32c) 273
aeaigt aanleat ( Wet, 13 c) 262
Rearetesnatinal (ata, 45 a) 280
aed grea geal (ata, 9c) 199
AAA: wat a (was, 5b) 24
aqgar: we (frat, 5 a) 24
Area S-G--H-Bt
(stfazt, 11a) 38
wales Aa
(at#, 23 a) 232
araleata eHTAEAT: (IA, 23 c) 232
wealeatageata (ata, 17c) 215
RAea RET TAAL

(ara, 13 d) 211
Agfa AerAVa TTA FAT:
(ata, 14 b) 213

ana THe (afta, 25a) 114
gat feqorad (afta, 20c) 108
geunfafeargaal (ita, 6c) 258
Bq a: (we, 37 b) 277
Reitqet Greaear (Te, 15 d) 213
Aeaiaaata: (ata, 11 a) 261
Raa: Heard (wa, 1 a) 243

a: att: aistaat (afina, 28 c) 124

a: atsanfa: catearat
(TH, 20 a) 220

--- Page 501 ---
380 APPENDIX IX

waea waa (afta, 23) = 112
aeea aie (afi, 14 c) 87
agenarageratey: (aa, 7 a) 259
aeeted at grat (fa, 15 c) 90
aaa qatat: (wfira, 17 a) 96
gavfaranr: egg (afast, 3 a) 18
graameaferar: (eta, 11 a) 205

efavre weuzet (eta, 5a) 181
faquint feaat (sta, 5c) 181
efaareeatsfirnteg & atext:

(*I, 6 b) 191
vfaad arged (sta, 7 a) 196
efaaatel ar: (ate, 17 a) 265
vanfraaarm: (HTT, 3c) 178
vfaafaciter watt afeatar:

(™Ia, 5 b) 181
wag TaTaaSaeA
("Ta, 48 b) 283

weg weg (afta, 29a) 125
Vas faadsdewa: cary
(a1, 13 d) 262

ay_raniraan (ita, 10c) 260
agiaamnsa: (att, 25d) 269
weed ofernrged (afta, 30.c) 127
wae samafaad (afta, 26.c) 115
Hed CATATAL FAA
(aft, 4d) 52
afeort feria 92 aga a
(aitferat, 11 b) 38
at: anager: (fits, 3a) 47

 

wifafrar: a waq

(nforer, 22 c) 110
wifeaqagina: (afta, 5c) 53
arfarcifor at (fret, 2 a) 7
antag at ye (afta, 4c) 52
aisat aera ar (siferet 2 d) 7
ay greet ara: (#ta, 1a) 172
faciapfafadta (ta, 42c) 279
faetagutersar (ie, 35a) 276
fasivatafgata (stew, 44 a) 280
faataraeaya (tat, 43 c) 280
faataraenyg- (ta, 36a) 276
fagassitaratast (aa, 23 c) 268
fagassitargfina: (ata, 29 a) 272
fagassaat frat (mt, 31 c) 273
fagagarafema: (ate 24) 269
facsrarifaaaa (Me, 28c) 271
facneatada at acat (afer, 9 d)71
faracatmdaa (afta 8c) 63
aaufat agra (ata, 19 c) 219
qaarsaaed (Ma, 6a) 258
aa ator ated (afta, 13a) 85
qa aeaaitsdsaat:

(afore, 17 c) 97
aaa aaa ga (afer, 29.) 125
TSHTT TEHATTAT

(afer, 15 a) 90
asHTT Sat ar (afra, 16 c) 93

Er Tama (afore, 14a) 87

afa-gega |@-a-aTe
(*tferet, 8 c) 31

--- Page 502 ---
INDEX OF HALF-VERSES 381

wft-Js-HH-qy-ga terest eT:

(sitfernt, 10 d) 37
wfaqegag Arey

(mIm, 22 c) 228
wfa cefara (vitfrat, 3c) 18
ufa-§-1-0-aHtTHT

(atfaet, 7 d) 28
uf aafiizeqed

(sitfarst, 3 a) 18
afrarcisedtata (Ma, 48 c) 283
afafeaer fader: (ra, 6c) 191

afararg (aitfret, 10 b) 37
afadt Hed A AeaaT

(sit, 37 d) 277
afaarare ftrere: afer:

(ate, 17 c) 265

afacrmaes a9 (itftet, 6 a) 26
wfafaetdisaresata wt

(vitftat, 8 b) 31
merereagar: (art, 16 c) 214

risa sfactaniia gaia

(alm, 21 b) 221
aiistteated EGET aT:

(era, 23 d) 232
sitsitwaraatd (aH, 24a) 234
aistteaaie gayat

(ma, 3 a) 245
Haaeaewad (afta, 32 c) 132

Rreacareatiocey ae:
(wre, 44 d) 280

aeam: @ fafara:

(afr, 21c) 109
aftzatgat faaa: (ett, 1c) 172
afecra fatten aret

(wre, 1d) 172
gscusatat ofse: (wt, 10a) 201

qerat qatearat (wre, 12a) 210

AROMAT AAA
(ttt, 46 d) 282

asararaazera (Tet, 49 c) 286
aaavarragara (mt, 49 a) 286
aguaadant (afta, 3 c) 50
aaa grat: (we, 16 a) 214
anarasatatta (afore, 11c) = 77
aaTARTATTT:

(afer, 6 b) a

aactcorgeatel (fra, 7 a) 60
aaqaafefaare (afore, 11a) 77

aereaat: (aitfernt, 7 d) 28
ae Tae AAYAAN:

(ara, 11 b) 205
ad ANA: TaHENY

(ater, 12 d) 210

arqaen fe antag (afer, 23 a) 112
arqaiatedted (Ma, 44c) 280

a@ atfa fwear oe ser
(atfast, 13d) 41

adara sfata: (ta, 46c) = - 282
aqat dari (afore, 9 a) 66

--- Page 503 ---
382 APPENDIX 1X

afageitat @ vat
(atfaet, 9c) 33

areay waa aag: (afta, 13 c) 85
a fagassatar aq

" (ata, 31a) 273 |

qyargat: sore (ate 50 c) = 287
quifagantas dteaat

(ate, 5d) 250
qargafefiratt (ate, 47 a) 283
aearegqari (afta, 22 a) 110
METH TATA AT

(itferet, 8 d) 31
eqTHATAACATEAHT (Tea, 14 a) 263
CUTATY EAT TTTT CATT

(afra, 2 d) 46
feacadinea ye (ate, 41.c) 279

 

fearqateartant: (iret, 45 c) 280
eReneat J aye
(mTa, 24 c) 234

eaeaferaratead (tt, 38a) 277
eagtfa: Saatq (Ma, 34 b) 274
wade cad (tat, 12a) —-262

eaqanedt gel wWeT:

(Ia, 21 d) 221
eqarad aat fray
(ata, 50b) —-287

eargietadga (ata, 25) 269
eaaieta farfaert (att, 26 c) 270
eargltracesat (ata, 28 a) 271

TASAMAN: TART:
(tet, 4 a) 179
