
--- Page 1 ---
ARYABHATIYA
OF
ARYABHATA

bd
Critically edited

with Introduction, English Translation,
Notes, Comments and Indexes

By
KRIPA SHANKAR SHUKLA

Deptt. of Mathematics and Astronomy
University of Lucknow -

in collaboration with

K. V. SARMA °
V. V. B. Institute of Sanskrit and Indological Studies
Panjab University

  
 
  

      

    

 
  
 

a

ie
le

INDIAN NATIONAL SCIENCE ACADEMY
NEW DELHI


--- Page 2 ---
Published for

THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR THE
COMPILATION OF HISTORY OF SCIENCES IN INDIA

by
The Indian National Science Academy
Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi—1

©

Indian National Science Academy
1976

Rs. 21.50 (in India)
$ 7.00; £2.75 (outside India)

EDITORIAL COMMITTEE

Chairman : F. C. Auluck.

Secretary : B. V. Subbarayappa

Member ; R.S. Sharma

Editors ; K.S. Shukla and K. V. Sarma

a

Printed in India

At the Vishveshvaranand Vedic Research Institute Press
Sadhu Ashram, Hoshiarpur (Pb.)


--- Page 3 ---
CONTENTS

FOREWORD
INTRODUCTION
1. Aryabhata—The author
2. His place
1. Kusumapura
2. Agmaka
3. His time
4. His pupils
5. Aryabhata’s works
6. The Aryabhatiya

1. Its contents

2. Acollection of two compositions
3. A work of the Brahma school

4, Its notable features

1.

PPI AwWRYWN

—
ad

11.
12.

The alphabetical system of numeral notation
Circumference-diameter ratio, viz.,
The table of sine-differences

Formula for sin @, when 8>7/2
Solution of indeterminate equations
Theory of the Earth’s rotation

The astronomical parameters

Time and divisions of time

Theory of planetary motion
Innovations in planetary computation
Celestial latitudes of the planets

Use of the radian measure in minutes

Its importance and popularity

6. Commentaries on the Aryabhatiya

wWwabRwWN >

a

(a) Commentaries in Sanskrit

Bhaskara I’s commentary

Prabhakara’s commentary

Somesvara’s commentary

Siryadeva Yajva’s commentary
Paramegvara’s commentary

Yallaya’s notes on Stiryadeva’s commentary

Page
iti
xvii
xvii
XVii
XVii
xix
XiX
XXii
XXiii
XXili
XXiil
XXV
xxvi
XXVii
XXVil
XXViii
XXViii
XXViii
xxviii
XXiX —
XXiX
XXiX
XXx1
AXXii
XXXL
XXXiV
XXXiV

XXXV

XXXV
XXXVi
XXXVi

XXXVil

xl
xl


--- Page 4 ---
vi

ARYABHATIYA
Page
9, Nilakantha Somayaji’s commentary xliv
8. Raghunatha-raja’s commentary xlvi
9. Commentary of Madhava 1
10. Bhitivisnu’s commentary li
11. Ghatigopa’s commentary litt
12. Kedandarama’s commentary liv
(b) ‘Commentaries in T elugu
13. Kodandarama’s commentary lv
14. Virtipaksa’s commentary lv
(c) Commentaries in Malayalam
15. Krsnadasa’s commentary lv
16. Krsna’s commentary lvi
17-18. Two commentaries by Ghatigopa lvi
(d) Commentary in Marathi
19. Anonymous commentary in Marathi lviii
- 7. Works based on the Aryabhatiya \viii
{. The works of Bhaskara I lviii
2. The Karana-ratna of Deva ~ Wiii
3. The Graha-cara-nibandhana of Haridatta lix
4. The Sisya-dhi-vrddhida of Lalla lix
5. The Karana-prakasa of Brahmadeva lxi
6. The Bhatatulya of Damodara Ixii
7. The Karana-paddhati of Putumana Somayaii Ixii
8. The Aryabhata-siddhanta-tulya-karana of Virasimha [xii
8. Transmission to Arab Ixii
7. The Aryabhata-Siddbanta Ixiii
1. The Aryabhata-siddhanta and the Aryabhatiya Ixiii

2. The astronomical instruments and special methods Ixv
3. Popularity of the Aryabhata-siddhanta and the

Khanda-khadyaka Ixvi

8. The present cdition Ixvili
(a) Sanskrit text Ixviii

1. Text manuscripts Ixix

2. Text preserved in commentaries . Ixxi

3. Quotations from later commentators _ Ixxii

4. Variations in reading Ixxiii

5. Selection of readings Ixxiv

(b) English translation, notes etc. xxiv

9, Acknowledgements lxxvi


--- Page 5 ---
CONTENTS

I, 1HE GITIKA SECTION

’ Invocation and Introduction

Method of writing numbers

Revolution-numbers and zero point

Kalpa, Manu and beginning of Kali

Planetary orbits, Earth’s rotation

Linear diameters

Obliquity of the ecliptic and inclinations of orbits

Ascending nodes and Apogees

Manda and Sighra epicycles

Rsine-differences

Aim of the Dasagitika-Satra

Il. GANITA OR MATHEMATICS
Invocation and Introduction
The first ten notational places
Square and squaring
Cube and cubing
Square root
Cube root
Area of a triangle
“Volume of right pyramids
Area of a circle
Volume of a sphere
Area of a trapezium
Area of plane figures
Chord of one-sixth circle
Circumference-diameter ratio
Computation of Rsine-table geometrically

Derivation of Rsine-differences

ee
Vit

Page

wo ~~ BS

33
33
34
35
36
37
38
39

40
42
43

45
45
51


--- Page 6 ---
Ovi ARYABHATIYA

Page

Construction of circle ete, and testing of level and verti-
cality ees 55
Radius of the shadow-sphere eee 36
Gnomonic shadow due to a lamp-post ae 37

Tip of the gnomonic shadow from the lamp-post and height
of the latter wee 57

Theorems on square of bypotenuse and on square of half-
chord eee 39
Arrows of intercepted arcs of intersecting circles eas 60
Sum (or partial sum) of a series in A.P. vee 61
Number of terms in a series in A.P. wes 63
Sum of the series 1-+-(1-+2)+(+2-+4-3)-+...tonterms... 64
Sum of the series 2n* and En? oes 65.
Product of factors from their sum and squares oes 67
Quantities from their difference and product eee 67
Interest on principal oe 68
Rule of three we 68
Simplification of the quotients of fractions vee 69
Reduction of two fractions to a common denominator... 70
Method of inversion aes 71
Unknown quantities from sums of all but one ees 71
Unknown quantities from equal sums oes 73
Meeting of two moving bodies see 73
Pulveriser coe 74
Residual pulveriser wee 74
Non-residual pulveriser see 77

TW, KALAKRIYA OR THE RECKONING OF TIME
Time divisions and circular divisions vee 85
Conjunctions of two planets in a yuga wee 86
Vyatipatas in a yuga tee 86

Anomalistic and synodic revolutions


--- Page 7 ---
CONTENTS ‘ ix

Page

Jovian years in a yuga eee 88
Solar years and lunar, civil and sidereal days ee 91
Intercalary months and omitted lunar days wes 91
Days of men, manes and gods, and of Brahma eee 92
Utsarpini, Apasarpini, Susama and Dussama eee 93
Date of Aryabhata I wee 95
Beginning of the Yuga, year, month and day vee 98
Equality of the linear motion of the planets aa 100
Consequence of equal linear motion of the planets ees 100
Non-equality of the linear measures of the circular

divisions vee 101
Relative positions of asterisms and planets wee 102
Lords of the hours and days eee 103
Motion of the planets explained through eccentric circles ... 104
Motion of planets explained through epicycles ees 105
Motion of epicycles Mae 106
Addition and subtraction of Mandaphala and Sighraphala ... 106.
A special pre-correction for the superior planets eee 108
Procedure of Mandaphala and Sighraphala corrections for

the superior planets eee 109
Mandaphala and Sighraphala corrections for inferior

planets aoe 110
Distance and velocity of a planet oe 111

Iv. GOLA OR THE CELESTIAL SPHERE
1. Bhagola

Position of the ecliptic see 113

Motion of theZnodes, the Sun and the Earth’s shadow, «s- 114


--- Page 8 ---
ARYABHATIYA

Motion of the Moon and the planets

Visibility of the planets

Bright and dark sides of the Earth and the planets
Situation of the Earth, its constitution and shape
Earth compared with the kadamba flower

Increase and decrease in the size of the Earth
Apparent motion of the stars due to the Earth’s rotation
Description of the Meru mountain

The Meru and the Badavamukha

The four cardinal cities

Positions of Lanka and Ujjayini

Visible and invisible portions of the Bhagola

Motion of the Bhagola from the north and south poles

Visibility of the Sun to the gods, manes and men

. 2, Khagola
The prime vertical, meridian and horizon
Equatorial horizon
The observer in the Khagola
The observer’s Dramandala and Drkksepavetia

The Automatic sphere (Gola-yantra)

3. Spherical astronomy
(1. Diurnal motion)
The latitude-triangle
Radius of the day-circle

Right ascensions of Aries, Taurus and Gemini

wee

Page
114
116
117
118
118
118
119°
121
122
123
123
126
127
127

128
128
128
129
129

130
132

133


--- Page 9 ---
‘CON TENTS

Earthsine
Rising of the four quadrants and of the individual signs

Rsine of the altitude

Sankvagra

Sun’s Agra

Rsine of the Sun’s prime vertical altitude

Sun’s greatest gaomon and the shadow thereof

(2. Parallax in a solar eclipse)

Rsine of the zenith distance of the central ecliptic point
Drggatijyas of the Sun and the Moon
Parallax of the Sun and the Moon

(3. The visibility corrections)

Visibility correction Aksadrkkarma for the Moon

Visibility correction Ayanadrkkarma of the Moon
°
(4, Eclipses of the Moon and the Sun)
Constitution of the Moon, Sun, Earth and Shadow,
and the eclipsers of the Sun and the Moon
Occurrence of an eclipse
Length of the shadow
Earth’s shadow at the Moon’s distance
Half-duration of a lunar eclipse
Half-duration of the totality of the lunar eclipse
The part of the Moon not eclipsed
Measure of the eclipse at the given time
Aksavalana
Ayanavalana for the first contact

Colour of the Moon during eclipse

xi
Page
135
136
139
141

141
142
144

144
146
147

148
149

151
151
152
153
154
155
155
156
158
159
161


--- Page 10 ---
xii ARYABHATIYA

When the Sun’s eclipse is not to be predicted
Planets determined from observation
Acknowledgement to Brahma

Conclusion

APPENDICES
I. Index of Half-verses and Key passages

II. Index-Glossary of Technical terms
II. Subject Index

IV. Select Bibliography on the Aryabhatiya and
allied texts

(a) Primary Sources

(b) Secondary Sources

Page
161
162
163
164

165

173
182

199
211


--- Page 11 ---
A
ASi
BBi
BM
BrJa
BrSam
BrSpSi
GCN
GSS
GK
GT
KK
KR

L
L(ASS)
LBh
LMa
MBh
MSi
NBi
PG
PSi
PuSi
RoSi
SiDVr
Sige
SiSi
SiTV
SMT
SuSi
Susi
Tris
VSi

ABORI
AMM

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
1. BOOKS

Aryabhatiya of Aryabhata 1
Aryabhata-siddhanta
Bhaskara II’s Bijaganita
Bakhshali Manuscript
Brhat-jataka of Varahamihira
Brhat-samhita of Varahamihira
Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta of Brahmagupta
Graha-cara-nibandhana of Haridatta
Ganita-sara-sangraha of Mahavira
Ganita-Kaumudi of Narayana
Ganita-tilaka of Sripati
Khanda-khadyaka of Brahmagupta
Karana-ratna of Deva
Talavati of Bhaskara II
Lilavati (Anandasrama Sanskrit Series)
Laghu-Bhaskariya of Bhaskara I
Laghu-manasa of Mafijula (Mufijala)
Maha-Bhaskariya of Bhaskara I
Maha-siddhanta of Aryabhata II
Narayana’s Bijaganiia
Patiganita of Stidhara
Paitca-siddhantika of Varahamihira
Pulisa-siddhanta
Romaka-siddhanta
Sisya-dhi-vyddhida of Lalla
Siddhanta-sekhara of Sripati
Siddhanta-siromani of Bhaskara II
Siddhanta-tattya-viveka of Kamalakara
Sumati-maha-tantra of Sumati
Sundara-siddhanta of Jitanaraja
Surya-siddhanta
Trisatika of Sridhara
Vatesvara-siddhanta

2. PERIODICALS ETC.

e
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute
American Mathematical Monthly


--- Page 12 ---
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

An, SS Anandasrama Sanskrit Series

AR Asiatick Researches

BCMS Bulletin of the Calcutta Mathematical Society

BM Bibliotheca Mathematica

BNISI Bulletin of the National Institute of Sciences of India

Ep, Ind, Epigraphia Indica

Ic Indian Culture

IJHS Indian Journal of History of Science

THO Indian Historical Quarterly

INSA Indian National Science Academy

JA Journal Asiatique

JAOS Journal of the American Oriental Society

JBBRAS — Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic
Society

JASB Journal of the (Royal) Asiatic Society of Bengal

JASGBI Journal of the Asiatic Society of Great Britain and
Ireland

JBORS Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society

JBRS Journal of the Bihar Research Society

JDLICV Journal of the Department of Letters of the Calcutta
University

JIBS Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies (Tokyo)

JIMS Journal of the Indian Mathematical Society

JORM Journal of Oriental Research, Madras

Math. Edu. Mathematics Education

OQOJMS Quarterly Journal of the Mythic Society

TSS Trivandrum Sanskrit Series

ZDMG Zeitschrift fur Deutsche Morgenlandischen Gesell-
schaften

3. COMMENTATORS

Bh. Bhaskara I Ra. Raghunatha-raja

Br. Brahmagupta Sa. Sankaranarayana

Go. Govinda-svami So. Somesvara

Kr. Krsnadasa Su. Stryadeva

Ni. Nilakantha Ud. Udayadivakara

Pa. Parame$vara Ya. Yallaya

Pr. Prthtdaka


--- Page 13 ---
ROMAN TRANSLITERATION OF DEVANAGARI
VOWELS

Short : a £ 3 & ¥F (and &)

a iu er |

Long : am € SU wt VT a}
a i @e o ai au
Anusvara : 7 =< m
Visarga: 2 = fA
Noneaspirant : ” ‘S
CONSONANTS
Classified :  & a T a g
k kh g gh n
7% 4 F
c ch j jh ii
zz § © © H ,
t th q dh n
1 4 © 4 4
t th d dh n
7 8 q q
p ph b bh m
Un-classed :  @ zt a a a 6
y r I v § $
Compound: & a w
ks tr ji

xv

a 0


--- Page 14 ---
INTRODUCTION

The present volume, which forms Part I of our edition of the
Aryabhatiya, contains a critically edited text of the Aryabhatiya and
its English translation along with explanatory and critical notes and
comments.

1. ARYABHATA—THE AUTHOR

The Aryabhatiya is a composition of Aryabhata. The author
mentions his name at two places in the Aryabhafiya, first in the
Opening stanza of the first chapter ‘(viz., Gitikd-pada) and then in the
opening stanza of the second chapter (viz., Ganita-pada). In the conclu-
ding stanza, he calls the work Aryabhatiya (‘A composition of Aryabhata’)
after his own name.

This Aryabhata is a different person from his namesake of the
tenth century A.D., the author of the Mahd-siddhanta. To distinguish
between the two, the author of the Aryabhatiya is called Aryabhata I,
and the author of the Maha-siddhanta is called Aryabhata I.

It is Aryabhata I, author of the Aryabhafiya, after whose name
the first Indian satellite was designated ‘Aryabhata’ and put into orbit
on April 19, 1975 and whose 1500th birth anniversary is being celebrated
now.

2. HIS PLACE

2.1. Kusumapura

Aryabhata I does not expressly state the place to which he
‘belonged, but he mentions Kusumapura and there are reasons to believe
that he lived at Kusumapura and wrote his Aryabhatiya there. In
stanza 1 of chapter ii of the Aryabhafiya, he writes :

“Aryabhata sets forth here the knowledge honoured at
Kusumapura.”? ”

1, wrdvefteag finafa gyagtseafad sam 1 (A, ii, 1)

 


--- Page 15 ---
xviii INTRODUCTION

The commentator Parameévara (A.D. 1431) interprets this statement
as meaning :
“Aryabhata sets forth in this country called Kusumapura, the
knowledge honoured. at Kusumapura.”’..

The commentator Raghunatha-raja (A.D. 1597), too, interprets it in a
similar way :
“Aryabhata, while living at Kusumapura, sets forth the know-
ledge honoured at Kusumapura.””

That Aryabhata I belonged to Kusumapura is substantiated by the
following stanza which is quoted in connection with Aryabhata I :

“When the methods of the five Siddhantas began to yield
results conflicting with the observed phenomena such as the
settings of the planets and the eclipses, etc., there appeared in
the Kali age at Kusumapuri SUrya himself in the guise of
Aryabhata, the Kulapa well versed in astronomy,’”?

The Persian scholar Al-Bictini (A.D. 973-1048), too, has, on occasions
more than one, called him ‘Aryabhata of Kusumapura’.”

Bhaskara I (A.D. 629), the earliest commentator of the Aryabhatiya,
identifies Kusumapura with Pataliputra in ancient Magadha, and ‘the
knowledge honoured at Kusumapura’ with the teachings of the Svadyam-
bhuva- or Brahma-siddhanta, We also informs us that at Magadha the
year commenced on the first tihi of the dark half of the month Sravana
and ended on the fifteenth tithi of the light half of the month Asadha.
From the writings of the early Jaina scholars who belonged to Kusuma-
pura we know that the astronomers of Pataliputra in Magadha were the
followers of the Brahma school. We also know that in Magadha, since
A.D. 593 down to the present day, the year, which is known as ‘Sala’
there, is taken to commence from the first fithi of the dark half of the
month Sravana.

Hence we can conclude without any shadow of doubt that Arya-
bhata I flourished at Kusumapura or Pataliputra in ancient Magadha,
or modern Patna (long. 25°'37 N., lat. 85°°13 E.) in Bihar State.

 

 

 

1, feararswefraafe qiaegntenacraaaacaragat |

qa: tad qgngivaq sat q ytafea Fat adiverfrata:
2. See for example, Al-Birtni’s India, translated by E.C. Sachau,
Vol, I, London (1910), pp. 176, 246, 330 and 370.


--- Page 16 ---
ARYABHATA’S TIME xix

Repeated homage to Brahma’ (the promulgator of the Svayambhuva-
siddhanta) and acknowledgement to ‘the grace of Brahma” in the
Aryabhatiya, also point to the same conclusion.

2.2. Asmaka

Bhaskara I (629 A.D.), the commentator of the Aryabhatiya,
refers to Aryabhata I as Agmaka, his Aryabhatiya by the names Asmaka-
tantra and Asmakiya, and his followers by the designation ASmakiyah
at several places in his writings in more than one context.

The use of the above-mentioned words shows that Aryabhata
I was an Asmaka, i.e,, his original homeland was Asmaka. According
to the commentator Nilakantha (1500 A.D.), he was born in the
Aémaka Janapada.> (For Asmaka, see vol. II, introduction, pp. xxvii-
xxviii).

It seems that Aryabhata I was an Asmaka who lived at Pataliputra
(modern Patna) in Magadha (modern Bihar) and wrote his Aryabhatiya
there. Magadha in ancient times was a great centre of learning. The
famous University of Nalanda was situated in that state in the modern
district of Patna. There was a special provision for the study of
astronomy in this University. According to D.G. Apte,‘ an astronomical
observatory was a special feature of this University. Im a passage
quoted above, Aryabhata I has been designated as Kulapa (= Kulapati
or Head of a University), It is quite likely that he was a Kulapati of
the University of Nalanda which was in a flourishing state in the fifth
and sixth centuries A.D. when Aryabhata I lived.

3. HIS TIME

The year of birth of Aryabhata I is known to us with precision.
There is a verse in the Aryabhafiya which runs as follows: “When
sixty times sixty years and three quarter-yugas had elapsed (of the

1. A,i.i; A, ii1,
2. 4, iv. 49.
x
3. See, opening lines of Nilakantha’s comm, on Ganitapada,
4

See Universities in Ancient India, p. 30,


--- Page 17 ---
xx - INTRODUCTION

current yuga), twenty-three years had then. passed since my birth.”
This shows that in the Kali year 3600 (elapsed), Aryabhata I was twenty-
three years of age. Since the Kali year 3600 (elapsed) corresponds to
A.D. 499, it follows that Aryabhaza I was born in the year ‘A.D. 476.
The Gupta king Buddhagupta reigned at Pataliputra from A.D. 476 to
A.D. 496. This shows that Aryabhata I was born in the same year in
which Buddhagupta took over the reigns of government at Pataliputra.

To be more precise, 3600 years of the Kali era came to an end
on Sunday, March 21, A.D. 499, at mean noon at Lanka or Ujjayini,
at the time of Mean Sun’s entrance into the sign Aries (madhyama-
mesa-sankranti) (See the table given below). So, the time of birth
of Aryabhata I may be fixed at Mesa-sankranti on March 21,
A. D. 476, Since at the end of the Kali year 3600 the precession
of the equinoxes amounted to zero (see the next paragraph), the
amount of the precession of the equinoxes 23 years before the time
of Aryabhata’s birth was negligible, Hence his birth may be taken
to have occurred at nirayana-mesa-sahkranti or at sayana-mesa-
sankranti. The Bihar Research Society, Patna, celebrates the birth anni-
versary of Aryabhata on April 13, the day on which the Sun now enters
into the nirayana sign Aries (i. e., on the nirayana mesa-sankranti day).

Mean positions of the Planets?

“at Kali 3600 elapsed, i.c., on Sunday, March 21, A.D. 499, mean noon
at Ujjayini.

 

Ee
Planet Aryabhatiya. Aryabhata- Ptolemy Moderns
_ ; siddhanta __
Sun 0° 00" 0° 00" 357° 8" 16" 359° 42’ 5”
Moon 280° 48’ 0” 280° 48’ 0” 278° 24’ 58” 280° 24’ 52”

Moon’s apogee 35° 420" —-35° 42’ 0" 32° 43'.42” 35° 24" 38”
Moon’s asc. node 352° 12” 9” 352° 12' 0” 349° 25’ 33” 352° 2’ 26”

Mars 7 12° 0" 37° 12’ 0" 4° 20’ 12" 6° 52’ 45”
Mercury 186° 00’ 0” 180° 0’ 0” 178° 0’ 27” 183° 9° 51”
Jupiter 187° 12’ 0” 186° 0’ 0" 185° 20’ 55” 187° 10’ 47”
Venus 356° 24’ 0" 356° 2470" 351° 4’ 15” 356° 7’ 51”

Saturn 49° 120" 49° 12’ 0” 45° 55’ 39” 48° 21’ 13”
1, qscaacrat yfszdar sadlareraest QTd: |
safaar faafazeareate aA aeaitsetat: uv (A, iii. 10)
2. Taken from Siddhanta-Sekhara of Sripati, Part II, edited by


--- Page 18 ---
ARYABHATA'S TIME xsi

It may be asked : What consideration prompted Aryabhata I
to mention the end of the Kali year 3600 which happened to occur
on Sunday, March 21, A.D. 499, at mean noon at Ujjayini ? Or,
does it denote the time of composition of the Aryabhatiya ? According
to the commentators of the Aryabhatiya, the object of specifying
the end of the Kali year 3600 was to show that at that time the
precession of the equinoxes amounted to zero and the mean positions
of the planets obtained from the astronomical parameters given in the
Gitika-pada did not require any correction. — The commentator
Suryadeva (b. A.D. 1191), Parame$vara (A.D. 1431) and Nilakantha
(A.D, 1500), however, are of opinion that this was also the time
of composition of the Aryabhatiya. K. Sambasiva Sistri, W.E. Clark
and Baladeva Misra, too, hold the same opinion. P.C, Sengupta once
entertained this view but later discarded it.

‘

The ‘Kerala astronomer Haridatta (also called Haradatta)
(c. A.D. 683), the alleged author of the so-called Sakabda correction
(with epoch at Saka 444), has, as remarked by the commentator
Nilakantha’ (rather in surprise), interpreted the above-mentioned verse
of the Aryabhatiya (viz, iti. 10) in a different way: “When sixty times
sixty years and three quarter-yugas had elapsed (of the current yuga),
twenty-three years of my age have passed since then,” No commen-
tator of the Aryabhatiya, not even of Kerala, has” interpreted the
above passage in this way. T. S. Kuppanna Sastri has called it
a wrong interpretation.2. Another Kerala astronomer (probably
Jyesthadeva), author of the Drkkarana (A.D. 1603), an astronomical
manual in Malayalam, has actually stated that Aryabhata I was born
in A.D. 499 and that Aryabhata 1 wrote the Aryabhatiya twenty-three

—ae

Babuaji Misra, Calcutta, 1947, introduction by P.C. Sengupta and
N.C. Lahiri, p. xii.

1. See his commentary on A, iv. 48, p. 150 of the printed
edition, Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, No. 185.

2. See Mahabhaskariyam, edited by TS. Kuppanna Sastri,.

introduction, p. Xvi. -


--- Page 19 ---
xxii INTRODUCTION

years later, in 522 A.D,’ This, according to T.S. Kuppanna Sastri, is
a mistaken impression,”

It must be noted that the translation of the verse in question
as given earlier (on p. xix-xx) is in agreement with the interpretation of
the commentators. This is also in conformity with what, according to
Bhaskara I, Aryabhata I- himself told his pupils while teaching the
subject.

However, the duality of interpretation of the above verse has
given rise to two epochs (called bhatabda, ‘the year of Aryabhata’)
associated with Aryabhata I, viz. Saka 421 (—A.D. 499) and Saka 444
(=A.D. 522), and to two bija corrections, one taking the beginning
of Saka 421 and the other. the beginning of Saka 444 as the zero
point,

4. HIS PUPILS

No more information regarding the life of Aryabhatal is now
available to us, The Aryabhafiya does not throw light on such
aspects as his parentage, his educational careeer, or other details of
his personal life. From the writings of Bhaskara I (A.D. 629), it
appears that Aryabhata I took up, as was expected of him, the
profession of a teacher. Bhaskara I mentions the names of Pandu-
rahga-svimi, Latadeva and Ni§anku amongst those who learnt astronomy
at the feet of Aryabhata I. Of these pupils of Aryabhata I, Lata-
deva is the most important and deserves special notice, He earned
aname as a great scholar and teacher of astronomy. Bhaskara I
_ has called him Ac@rya (‘Learned Teacher’) and Sarva-siddhanta-guru
(‘teacher of all systems of astronomy’ or ‘well versed in all systems of
astronomy’), From the writings of Varahamihira (died A.D. 587) and
Stipati (A.D. 1039), we learn that Latadeva was the author of at
least two works on astronomy; in one, the day was measured from
midnight at Lanka (lat. 0, long, 75°43 E), Varahamihira has also

 

 

1. See Grahacaranibandhana, edited by K.V. Sarma, introduction,
p.v. The same is stated in the Sadratnamala of Sankaravarman
(A.D. 1800-38). See A history of the Kerala school of Hindu astronomy,
by K.V. Sarma, p. 8.

2. Ibid, p. xv.


--- Page 20 ---
ARYABHATA’S WORKS xxili

ascribed to him the authorship of two commentaries, one on the
Romaka-siddhanta and the other on the PauliSa-siddhanta, According
to the Persian scholar Al-Birtni (A.D. 973 to A.D, 1048), Latadeva
was the author of a Swurya-siddhanta, Reference to ‘Acarya Latadeva’
has been made by Brahmagupta (A.D. 628) and his commentator
Prthtidaka (A.D, 860) too. Prthtidaka has also quoted a number of
verses from some work of Latadeva. These verses are in arya metre
and their language and style are similar to those of the Aryabhatiya.

5. ARYABHATA'S WORKS
Aryabhata I wrote at least two works on astronomy :

1, Aryabhatiya
2, Aryabhata-siddhanta.

The former is well known; the latter is known only through
references to it in later works.

Varahamihira has distinguished the two works by the reckoning
of the day adopted in them. “Aryabhata said,” writes he,' “that the
day begins at midnight at Lanka ; the same (Aryabhata) again said that
the day begins from sunrise at Lanka.” Other differences between the
two works of Aryabhata I have been noted by Bhaskara I in this Maha-
Bhaskariya (vii. 21-35)? °

6 THE ARYABHATIYA
6.1. lis contents

The Aryabhatiya deals with both mathematics and astronomy.
It contains 121 stanzas in all, and is marked for brevity and concise-
ness of composition. At places its style is aphoristic and the case-
endings are dispensed with. Like the Yoga-darSana of Patafijali, the
subject matter of the Aryabhatiya is divided into 4 chapters, called
Pada (or Section).

Pada | (viz., Gitika-pada), consisting of 13 stanzas (of which 10
are in gitikd@ metre), sets forth the basic definitions and important
astronomical parameters and tables. It gives the definitions of the
larger units of time (Kalpa, Manu and yuga), the circular units (sign,

1. See PSi, xv. 20.

2. Se infra, Tables 1-5, under Sn, 8.1 below.

 


--- Page 21 ---
axiv . INTRODUCTION

degree and minute) and the linear units (yojana, nr, hasta‘and angula) :
and states the number of rotations of the Earth and the revolutions
of the Sun, Moon and the planets etc. in ‘a period of 43,20,000 years,
the time and place from which the planets are supposed to have
Started motion at the beginning of the current yuga as well as the
time elapsed since the beginning of the current Kalpa up to the
beginning of Kaliyuga, the positions of the apogees (or aphelia) and the
ascending nodes of the planets in the time of the author, the orbits of
Sun, Moon and the planets including the periphery of the so-called
sky, the diameters of the Earth, Sun, Moon and the planets, the obliquity
of the ecliptic, and and the inclinations (to the ecliptic) of the orbits of
the Moon and the planets, the epicycles of the Sun, Moon and the
planets, and a table of sine-differences,

Pada 2 (viz. Ganita-pada), consisting of 33 stanzas, deals with
mathematics. The topics dealt with are the geometrical figures, their
properties and mensuration ; problems on the shadow of the gnomon ;
series ; interest ; and simple, simultaneous, quadratic and linear
indeterminate equations. The arithmetical methods for extracting the
square root and the cube root and rules meant for certain specific
mathematical problems including the method of constructing the sine
table are also given.

Pada 3 (viz. Kalakriya-pada), containing 25 stanzas, deals with
the various units of time and the determination of the true positions
of the Sun, Moon and the planets, It gives the divisions of the year
(month, day, etc.) and those of the circle ; describes the various kinds
of year, month and day; defines the beginning of the time-cycle, the
so-called circle of the sky, and the lords of hours and days ;. explains
the motion of the Sun, Moon and the planets by means of eccentric
circles and the epicycles ; and gives the method for computing the true
longitudes .of the Sun, Moon and the planets.

Pada 4 (viz. Gola-pada), consisting of 50 stanzas, deals wtih the
motion of the Sun, Moon and the planets on the celestial sphere. It
describes the various circles of the celestial sphere and indicates the
method of automatically rotating the sphere once in twenty-four hours ;
explains the motion of the Earth, Sun, Moon and the planets; des-
ctibes the motion of the celestial sphere as seen by those on the


--- Page 22 ---
THE ARYABHATIYA xxv

equator and by those on the north and south poles; and gives rules
relating to the various problems of spherical astronomy. — It also
deals with the calculation and graphical representation of the eclipses
and the visibility of the planets,

6.2. A collection of two compositions

The Aryabhatiya is generally supposed to be a collection of two
compositions : (1) Dasagitika-sttra (Aphorisms in 10 gitika stanzas),
which consists of Pada 1, stating the astronomical parameters in 10
stanzas in gitika metre, and (2) AryastaSata (108 stanzas in arya metre)
or Aryabhata-tantra (Aryabhata’s tantra), which consists of the second,
third and fourth Padgs, containing in all 108 stanzas in @rya@ metre.
It is noteworthy that the Dasagitika-sutra and the Aryasfasata both
begin with an invocatory stanza and end with a concluding stanza
in praise of the work and look like two different works. The
commentator BhdskaraI (A.D. 629) regards the two as two different
works and designates his commentaries on them by the names
DaSagitika-sutra-vyakhya and Aryabhata-tantra-bhasya, respectively.
He has also referred to the  Dasagitikd-sutra’ as syatantrantara
(author’s own tantrantara) in the Aryabhata-tantra-bhasya.’ Other
commentators of the Aryabhatiya, too, hold the same opinion. The
commentator Stryadeva (6. A.D. 1191) has.called the Dasagitika-sutra and
the AryastaSata as two compositions (nibandhanadyaya), The commen-
tator Raghunatha-raja (A.D. 1597) has also made similar statements.
The commentators Yallaya (A.D. 1480) and Nilakantha (A.D. 1500) have
commented upon the second, third and fourth chapters of the Arya-
bhatiya only, which shows that they regarded these chapters as forming
one complete work. The north Indian astronomer Brahmagupta
(A.D. 628) has also referred to Pada 1 of the Aryabhatiya as Dasagitika
and the rest of the Aryabhatiya as Aryastagata.

It seems that the Dasagitika-sutra, which begins with an invocatory
stanza and ends with a concluding stanza in praise of it, was issued as
a separate tract, like the multiplication tables of arithmetic, and was
meant for the freshers who were expected to learn the astronomical
parameters given therein by heart before embarking upon the study of

——— ee

1. ‘See Part I, p. 188.
A..Bh, iv

 


--- Page 23 ---
arvi INTRODUCTION

astronomy proper. The Aryastosata was meant for those who had
mastered the Dasagitika-sntra and were qualified for the study of
astronomy proper.

There is no doubt, however, that the Dasagitika-sntra and the
AryastaSata, taken together, form the Aryabhafiya and that the Dasa-
gitikd-sttra, the Ganita, the Kalakriya, and the Gola form the four
chapters of the Aryabhatiya. This is quite clear from the following
stanza of the Dasagitika-sutra where the author proposes to deal in that
work three topics, viz., ganita, kdlakriya and gola:

“Having paid obeisance to Brahma —who is one and many, the
real God, the Supreme Brahman—<Aryabhata sets forth the
three, viz,, mathematics (ganita), reckoning of time (kalakriyé)
and celestial sphere (go/a).”

Moreover, the four chapters are generally known as Gitika-pada,
Ganita-pada, Kalakriya-pada, and Gola-pada, respectively. The word
pada means quarter or one fourth, and unless there are four chapters
in a book its chapters cannot be rightly called Padas or ‘Quarters’.

It is noteworthy that Aryabhata I himself has called Gitikd-pada
by the name Dasagitika-sutra and the whole work by the name Arya-
bhatiya. Thenames Aryastafata and Aryabhata-tantra were given to
the second, third and fourth Padas by later writers. The former occurs
for the first time in the Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta of Brahmagupta ; the
latter seems to be due to Bhaskara I.

6.3. A work of the Brahma school

From the obeisance to Brahma in the opening stanzas of the first
and second Padas of the Aryabhatiya, it is evident that Aryabhata I was
a follower of the Brahma school of Hindu astronomy. Acknowledge-
ment of His grace at the successful completion of the Aryabhatiya in
one of the closing stanzas of this work shows how deeply was he
devoted to Him. This devotion to God Brahma has led people to
suppose that Aryabhata I acquired his knowledge of astronomy by
performing penance in propitiation of God Brahma. In his commentary
on the Aryabhafiya (i. 2), Bhaskara I writes :

“This is what one hears said: This Acatrya worshipped God
Brahma by severe penance. So, by His grace was revealed


--- Page 24 ---
THE ARYABHATIYA xxvii

to him the true knowledge of the subjects pertaining to the
true motion of the planets. It is said: ‘(Aryabhata) who
exactly followed into the footsteps of (Vyasa) the son of
Par&Sara, the ornament among men, who, by virtue of penance,
acquired the knowledge of the subjects beyond the reach of
the senses and the poetic eye capable of doing good to others’,”

Aryabhata’s devotion to Brahma was indeed of a high order.
For, in his view, the end of learning was the attainment of the Supreme
Brahman and this could be easily achieved by the study of astronomy.
In the closing stanza of the DaSagitika-sntra, he says :

“Knowing this Dasagitika-sutra, the motion of the Earth and
the planets, on the celestial sphere, one attains the Supreme
Brahman after piercing through the orbits of the planets and
the stars.”

Aryabhata I’s predilection for the Brahma school of astronomy
may have been inspired by two main considerations, Firstly, the
Brahma school was the most ancient school of Hindu astronomy
promulgated by God Brahma himself. Secondly, the astronomers of
Kusumapura, where Aryabhata I lived and wrote his Aryabhatiya, were
the followers of that school. “The learned people of Kusumapura”,
writes Bhaskara J, “held the Svayambhuva-siddhanta i& the highest
esteem, even though the Paulisa, the Romaka, the Vasistha and the
Saurya Siddhéntas were (known) there.”

6.4. Its notable features
The following are the notable features of the Aryabhatiya 5

1. The alphabetical system of numeral notation. (i. 2)

The alphabetical system of numeral notation defined by Arya-
bhata I is different from the so-called katapayadi system but much
more effective in expressing number briefly in verse,

According to this notation —

aay denotes the number 43,20,000
aafifiegqog n * 5,77,53,336
fefrrqurcg » » 1,58,22,37,500

For details see below, Gitika-pada, vs. 2, p. 3-5.


--- Page 25 ---
azviii INTRODUCTION
2. Circumference-digmeter ratio, viz,, *==3.1416. (ii. 10)
Aryabhata I states that
, Circumference : diameter=62832 : 20000,
which is equivalent to saying that *=3°1416.
This value of w is correct to four decimal places and is better
than the value 3141666 given by the Greek astronomer Ptolemy.’

It does not occur in any earlier work on mathematics and constitutes a
marvellous achievement of Aryabhata I.

It is noteworthy that Aryabhata I has called this value only
‘approximate’.
3. The table of sine-differences. (i, 12)

Aryabhata I is probably the earliest astronomer to have given
a table of sine-differences. He has also stated geometrical and
theoretical methods for constructing sine-tables. For details see below
Ganita-pada, vss. 11 and 12, pp. 45-54.

4. Formulae for sin 0, when 0> 12. (iii. 22)
Aryabhata I uses the following formulae :
sin(7/2-++ 6) =sinw/2—versin 6
sin(7-}-6) ==sin /2—versin/2—sin 8
sin(3m/2-++ 4) =sinw/2—versina /2— sin /2+-versin 0.

These formulae were later used by Brahmagupta also, evidently
under the influence of Aryabhata I.

5: Solution of indeterminate equations of the following types :

(i) N=axtbh=cytd =eztf=.n.icee
(ii) (x= o[b=a whole number.

 

1. See Sir Thomas Heath, A History of Greek Mathematics,
vol. 1, p. 233; and D.E. Smith, History of Mathematics, vol. 2,
p. 308,

2, See BrSpSi, ii, 15-16.


--- Page 26 ---
THE ARYABHATIYA xxix

Aryabhata I is the earliest to have given the general solution
of problems of the following types which reduce to the solution of the
above equations : :

(i) Find the number which yields 5 as the remainder when
divided by 8, 4 as the remainder when divided by 9, and 1 as
the remainder when divided by 7.

(ii) 16 is multiplied by a certain number, the product is
diminished by 138, and the difference thus obtained being
divided by 487 is found to be exactly divisible. Find the
multiplier and the quotient.

For Aryabhata I’s solution, see below, Ganita-pada, vss. 32-33,
p. 75 ff.

6. Theory of the Earth's rotation

It was generally believed that that the Earth was stationary and
lay at the centre of the universe and all heavenly bodies revolved round
the Earth. But Aryabhata I differed from the other astronomers and
held the view that the Earth rotates about its axis and the stars are
fixed in space. The period of one sidereal rotation of the Earth
according to Aryabhata I is 23" 56" 4°11 The corresponding modern
value is 23856" 4*091.27 The accuracy of Aryabhata I’s value is
remarkable. °

7. The astronomical parameters

The astronomical parameters given by Aryabhata I differ from
_ those of the other astronomers and are based on his own observations.
They are much better than those given by the earlier astronomers.
The method used by AryabhataI for their determination has been
indicated by him in the Gola-pada (vs. 48). .

For Aryabhata I’s astronomical parameters, see Gitika-pada.
8. Time and divisions of time

Aryabhata I does not believe in the theory of creation and annihi-
lation of the world, For him, time is a continuous process, without

 

 

1. See Gitika-pada, vs. 3.

2. See W.M. Smart, Text-book on Spherical Astronomy,
Cambridge, 1923, p, 492,


--- Page 27 ---
ext INTRODUCTION

beginning and end (anadi and anania). The beginnings of the yuga
and Kalpa, according to him, have nothing to do with any terrestrial
occurrence ; they are purely based on astronomical phenomena
depending on the positions of the planets in the sky.

In the Smrtis as also in the Strya-siddhanta, we have the following
pattern of time-division :

1 Kalpa=14 Manus
1 Manu=71 yugas
1 Yuga—=43,20,000 years.

In order to make the Kalpa equivalent to 1000 Yugas (in round
number), every Manu is supposed to be preceded and followed by a
period of 2/5 of a yuga, called twilight. A period of 3°95 yugas is
further earmarked for the time spent in the creation of the world, so
that when the world order starts all planets occupy the same place.

A Kalpa is defined as a day of Brahma, 2 Kalpas as a nycthe-
meron (day and night) of Brahma, 720 Kalpas as a year of Brahma,
and 100 years of Brahma (or 72,000 Kaipas) as the. lifespan of Brahma.
The age of Brahma, according to the Sarya-siddhanta, at the beginning
of the current Kalpa, was 50 years, The current Kalpa is the first
day of the Sist year of Brahma’s life, and 6 Manus with their twilights
and 27325 yugas had elapsed at the beginning of Kaliyuga since the
beginning of the current Kalpa.

Moreover, a yuga is taken to be composed of 4 smaller yugas
bearing the names Krta, Treté, Dvapara and Kali. The lengths of
these smaller yugas are supposed to be 17,28,000 ; 12,96,000 ; 8,64,000
and 4,32,000 years, respectively.

Aryabhata I rejects this highly artificial scheme of time-division,
and replaces it by the following :
1 day of Brahma or Kalpa=14 Manus or 1008 yugas

1 Manu=72 yugas
1 yuga =43,20,000 years.


--- Page 28 ---
THE ARYAPHATIYA tzxi

Aryabhata I has dispensed with the periods of twilight and the
time spent in creation, and has simplified the scheme enormously.
Since 100820 (mod 7), every Kalpa under this scheme begins on the
same day, which is an additional advantage. Under this scheme,
6 Manus and 27% yugas had elapsed at the beginning of the current
Kaliyuga since the beginning of the current Kalpa.

Aryabhata, too, divided a yuga into 4 smaller yugas, but he takes
them to be of equal duration and calls them quarter-yugas, the duration
of each being 10,80,000 years. This is indeed a more scientific division,
because in every quarter yuga the planets make an integral number of
revolutions round the Earth.

Although the time-divisions given in the Surya-siddhanta and by
Aryabhata I differ so much, they have been so adjusted that the
beginning of the current Kaliyuga according to both of them falls on the
same day, viz., Friday, February, 18, 3102 B.C.

Aryabhata I has also divided his yugas into 2 divisions, Utsarpini
and Apasarpini; and further Utsarpint into Dussama and Susama, and
Apasarpini into Susama and Dussamé, respectively.’ This is evidently
under the influence of the Jaina scholars of Pataliputra where
Aryabhata I lived. Payaliputra, was the original home of the Jainas
and a bulwark of Jaina saints and scholars in ancient times.

9. Theory of the planetary motion

The computation of the planetary positions in the Aryabhatiya is
‘based on the following hypotheses :

Hypothesis 1. In the beginning of the current yuga, which occurred
on Wednesday, 32,40,000 years before the commencement of the current
quarter-yuga, all the planets together with the Moon’s apogee and the
Moon’s ascending node were in conjunction at the first point of the
asterism Aégvini (f Piscium). (Gitika-pada, vs. 4 (d)).

Hypothesis 2, The mean planets revolve in geocentric circular
orbits.

1, For details, see below, Kalakriya, vs. 9, pp. 93-94.


--- Page 29 ---
xzxii INTRODUCTION

The mean motions of the planets are given in terms of revolu-
tions performed by the planets round the Earth in a period of
43,20,000 years. These revolutions, as already stated, are based on
Aryabhata I’s own observations, and constitute the main distinguishing
feature of Aryabhata I’s astronomy. For details see Gitika-pada,
vss. 3-4.

Hypothesis 3. The true planets move in eccentric circles or in
epicycles.

For details see Kalakriya-pada, vss, 17-21.

The eccentric and the epicyclic theories of Aryabhata I have been
explained in greater detail by Bhaskara I in his Afaha-Bhaskariya (ch. iv).
Two things may, however, be mentioned here :

(i) The manda epicycles are not the actual epicycles but the
mean epicycles corresponding to the mean distances of
the planets,

(ii) The radius of the Sighra concentric (and therefore of the
Sighra eccentric), according to Aryabhata I, is equal to the
planet’s distance called mandakarna.

The Greek astronomer Ptolemy, too, explained the motion of
the planets with the help of epicycles and eccentric circles, but the
method used by Aryabhata I for explaining the planetary motion is
quite different and much simpler than that used by Ptolemy. Bina
Chatterji who has made a comparative study of the Greek and the
Hindu epicycles and eccentric theories, concludes that “Aryabhata’s
epicyclic and eccentric methods are unaffected by Ptolemaic ideas” .!

It may be pointed out that whereas the epicycles of Ptolemy are
of fixed dimensions, those of Aryabhata I vary in size from place to
place. The variable (or pulsating) epicycles probably yielded better
results, The later Hindu astronomers have followed Aryabhata I in
taking variable epicycles.

 

1. See Bina Chatterjee, The Khanda-khadyaka of Brahmagupta,
Vol. I, Appendix VI, p. 293. World Press, Calcutta, 1970.


--- Page 30 ---
NOTABLE FEATURES OF THE ARYABHATIYA xxxiii

Hypothesis 4
All planets have equal linear motion in their respective orbits.
(Kalakriya-pada, vs, 12).

10. Innovations in planetary computation

From the old Surya-siddhanta, summarized by Varahamihira,
and from the Sumati-mahatantra of Sumati, we learn that the earlier
astronomers performed four corrections in the case of the superior
planets (Mars, Jupiter and Saturn) and as many as five corrections
in the case of the inferior planets (Mercury and Venus) in order to
obtain their true positions! The fifth correction applied to the inferior
planets was again purely impirical in character and was artificially devised
to get correct results.. Aryabhata changed the old pattern of correction
and, in the case of the inferior planets, reduced the number of corrections
from five to three. In the the case of the superior planets, too, the
corrections were the same, but a pre-correction (equal to half the
equation of centre) was also prescribed. This innovation was an
improvement and yielded more accurate results,

In the case of finding planetary distances, the Surya-siddhanta®
prescribed the formula .

mandakarna + Sighrakarna
2
but Aryabhata® changed it to
mandakarna X Sighrakarna

‘11. Celestial latitudes of the planets

In the time of Aryabhata, astronomers were helpless in finding
the celestial latitudes of the planets. The methods given in the old
Saryasiddhanta,* summarised by Varahamihira, and even in the Siddhanta

 

 

1. See PSi, xvi.17-22, Also see K.S. Shukla, The Pafica-
siddhantika of Varahamihira (1), JJHS, vol. ix, no. 1, 1974, pp. 62-76.

2. vii. 14.

3. See A, iii. 25.

4. See PSi, xvi. 24-25,
A. Bh,’ v


--- Page 31 ---
aaxiv INTRODUCTION

of Aryabhata himself,’ (which was written earlier than the Aryabhatiya),
are not correct. It is Aryabhata who in his Aryabhatiya® for the first
time gave the correct method for finding the celestial Jatitude of planets,
both superior and inferior,

12. Use of the radian measure in minutes

Aryabhata is probably the earliest astronomer to use the radian
measure of 3438’ for the radius of his circles. His table of Rsine-
differences is also given in the same measure. Measurement of the radius
m minutes facilitates computation and most of the astronomers in
India have followed Aryabhata in this respect. Brahmagupta (A.D. 628)
who did not use this measure in his Rsine-table was Criticised by
Vatesvara (A.D. 904),

75. Its importance and popularity

Brevity and conciseness of expression, superiority of astronomical
constants, and innovations in astronomical methods rendered the
Aryabhatiya an excellent text-book on astronomy. It gave birth to
a new school of astronomy, the Aryabhata School, whose exponents
called themselves ‘disciples of Aryabhata’. These disciples of Aryabhata.
deified Aryabhata I as ‘Bhagavan’ and ‘Prabhu’ and held the teachings
of the Aryabhatiya in-the highest esteem, claiming greater accuracy for
them. BhasKara I, writing in the first half of the seventh century A.D.,
declares : “None except Aryabhata has been able to know the motion
of the heavenly bodies : others merely move in the ocean of utter dark-
ness of ignorance,” Bhaskara I was the most competent exponent
of the Aryabhata school. He wrote a commentary on the Aryabhatiya
and two other works on astronomy in illucidation of the teachings of
Aryabhata I. He earned a great name as a teacher of astronomy and
was well known as ‘guru’, The works of Bhaskara I throw a flood
of light on the astronomical theories and methods of AryabhataI and
on the earlier followers of Aryabhata I. His commentary on the
Aryabhatiya, which was utilized by most of the subsequent commentators,
was recognized as a work of great scholarship and its author came to be
designated as ‘all-knowing commentator’,

 

 

1. See ABA, vii. 28(c-d)-33.
2. iv. 3,


--- Page 32 ---
COMMENTARIES ON THE ARYABHATIYA ExxV

The works of Bhaskara I provided a great stimulus to the study
of the Aryabhatiya which became a popular work and continued to be
studied at various centres of learning in South India, especially in
Kerala, till recent times. The extent of the popularity enjoyed by the
Aryabhatiya can be easily estimated by the following facts: (1) There
is hardly any work dealing with Hindu astronomy which does not
refer to Aryabhata or quote from the Aryabhatiya. (2) There exist
a number of commentaries on the Aryabhatiya written in Sanskrit and
other regional languages by authors hailing from far-flung places in South
India. (3) There exist a number of independent astronomical works
which are based on the Aryabhatiya. (4) Calendrical texts and tables
used in South India after the first half of the seventh century A.D.
until the introduction of new works based on the western astronomical
tables and the Nautical Almanac were based on the Aryabhatiya ot
works baseil on it.

In northern India, too, the Aryabhatiya continued to be studied
at least up to the end of the tenth century A.D, Brahmagupta, wha
lived in the seventh century at Bhinmal in Rajasthan, made an
intensive study of this work. He utilized this work in writing his
Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta, and a number of passages in that work are
strikingly similar to those found to occur in the Aryabhatiya, Prtht-
daka, who lived at Kannavj in Uttar Pradesh, quotes, in lis commentaty
on the Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta written in A.D. 860, a number of
passages from the Aryabhatiya. It is remarkable that for finding the
volume of a sphere, Prthtidaka prescribes exactly the same rule as
found in the Aryabhatiya. He has evidently taken it from the Arya-

' bhatiya, since this rule is typically Aryabhata’s and. is not found tc
occur in any other work on Indian astronomy. Several passages from
the Aryabhatiya occur in the writings of the Kashmirian scholar Bhatfot-
pala who wrote about A.D. 968.

76. Commentaries on the Aryabhatiya
(a) Commentaries in Sanskrit

1. Bhaskara l’s commentary

Bhaskara I’s commentary on the Aryabhdtiya has been critically
edited in Part II of this Series. It is the earliest commentary on the
Aryabhatiya that has come down to us. Written at Valabhj in Say-


--- Page 33 ---
xxxvi INTRODUCTION

rastra (modern Kathiawar) in the year A.D. 629, it sets forth a compre:
hensive exposition of the contents of the Aryabhatiya. “These who want
to know everything written by Aryabhata”’, writes Sankaranarayana
(A.D. 869), “should read the commentary on the Aryabhatiya and the
Maha-Bhaskariya (written by Bhaskara I).”

2. Prabhakara’s commentary

From two passages in Bhaskara I’s commentary on the Arya-
bhatiya it appears that Prabhakara was an earlier commentator of the
Aryabhatiya. In both the places, Bhiskara I finds fault with the
interpretations given by Prabhakara. Bhaskara I calls him ‘Acirya
Prabhakara’, but says: “He is a teacher, bethinking thus I am not
censuring him.” This Prabhakara may have been the same person as
has been called ‘a disciple (follower) of Aryabhata’ by Bhaskara II (A.D.
1150) in his commentary on the Sisya-dhi-vrddhida of Lalla. Acarya Pra-
bhakara has also been mentioned by Sankarandrayana (A.D. 869),
Udaya-divakara (A.D. 1073), Stiryadeva’ (6, A.D. 1191) and Nilakantha
(A.D. 1500). Prabhakara’s commentary has not survived the ravages of
time, nor has it been mentioned by any later writer.

It is noteworthy that Suryadeva (b. A.D. 1191), in his commentary
on the Laghu-manasa (iv. 2), refers to Prabhakara as ‘Prabhakara-
guru’ and mentions his work Prabhakara-ganita. It is not known
whether this Prabhakara was the same person as one criticised by
Bhaskara I,

3. SomeSvara’s commentary

A manuscript of Somegvara’s commentary on the Aryabhatiya
exists in the Bombay University Library, Bombay.!_ The beginning and
end of it are as follows :

Beginning : alt aetara 7a:
awe ardnefaard: aaeq: srerae |
wat waGReT: 1
aafed aaa coreg sinafad fre wacat
afang aetna afer easet a fireafgara

1, Catalogue No, 335, Bookshelf No. 272, Accession No. 2495. _

 


--- Page 34 ---
COMMENTARIES ON THE ARYAFHATIYA xxxvii

aaararatanraanasiarantiaergarat = F:afacafearea wren:
BAA, AHERTT: — 7
sforqer etc.

End: eaveriufacrad agfirat gat satesrg
ASATHWMTAYSAaT ANAALTTZAT |
aralatiacrayqafaafat arencteatfeat
ae: AAT Fagen cist Ted sHCS TZ MN
Colophon: vfa Mtreacfarfararaadraered TATTA |

The contents of this commentary show that, as acknowledged
by the author himself in the closing stanza, it is a summary. of
Bhaskara I’s commentary. Even the introductory lines given before the
verses commented upon are sometimes almost exactly the same as found
in Bhaskara I’s commentary. In the commentary on the Gapitapada,
however, Somesvara has set some new examples besides those taken from
the commentary of Bbaskara I.

Somesvara’s commentary does not throw any light on the life and
works of its author. ,

A commentary by Someévara on the Khanda-khadyaka of
Brahmagupta is mentioned by Amaraja in the opening stanza of his
commentary on the same work. From the order in which Amaraja
mentions the names of the earlier commentators of the Khanda-
khadyaka, it appears that SomeSvara lived posterior to Bhattotpala
(A. D. 968). Since Amaraja lived about 1200 A.D., Somesvara must
have lived sometime between A.D, 968 and A.D. 1200.

4. Suryadeva Yajva’s commentary

Stryadeva calls himself SUryadeva Yajva, Stiryadeva Somasut and
sometimes SUryadeva Diksita.

Stryadeva’s commentary on the Aryabhatiya has been critically
edited in Part III of this Series. It is usually known by the following
names: Aryabhata-prakasa, Bhata-prakaia, Prak asa, Aryabhata-praka-
Sika, Bhata-prakasika and Prakasika.

_ Suryadeva’s commentary sets forth an excellent exposition of the
Aryabhatiya. It has been illucidated by further notes and ¢xamples by


--- Page 35 ---
xtrvili INTRODUCTION
Yallaya (A.D. 1480) and has been used as a source book by Paramesvara
(A.D. 1431) in writing his own commentary on the Aryabhatiya.
Suryadeva is the author of at least five commentaries, which he
wrote in the following order :
(1) An exposition of Govinda-svami’s bhasya on the Maha -
Bhaskariya of Bhaskara I (A.D. 629).
(2) Commentary on the Aryabhatiya
(3) Commentary on the Maha-yatra of Varahamihira.
(4) Commentary on the Laghu-mdnasa of Maiijula (A.D. 932).
() Commentary on the Jataka-paddhati of Sripati (A.D. 1039).

From his commentary on the Laghu-mdnasa of Majiijula (A.D.
932), we learn that :
(1) Suryadeva was born on Monday, 3rd tithi of the dark half.
of Magha, Saka 1113.(=A.D. 1191). The ahargana for that
day, according to the Aryabhata-siddhanta, was 15,68,004."

(2) He was a Brahmana of Nidhruva gotra.*

(3) He belonged to the Cola country (which roughly comprised
of Tanjore and Trichinopoly districts of Tamilnadu) and was
“Wye resident of the town called by the names Gangapura,
Gangapuri and Sriranga-ganpapurt? which may be easily
identified with Gafgai-konda-Colapuram (lat. 11° 13’ N,,

 

1, Stryadeva writes : fastafaa 1113 ae aragoy-gdtarat atrarz
graaidaztagratagisersoreatatse tT: 15,68,004.
2. See colophons at the ends of chs. iand ii.

3. Cf, Was WHIge (Trar) weyasegrafeemeagicafa:
(LM4@, ii. 1 com.); Waar TYTGe frareazgo: AT 48, 38, 16 (Lada, ii.
lcom.); THAT Aeqaraaifa oT 24, 19, 8 ot: wT KAT sATAA:
Haea 254, qaer 280, fagaer 315-7" cara meyIgt Aarfearerwaegey-
faadtarafa afta (La, ii, 2com.) ; afeaqargeta weyrgat seedae*
agytsretaarag megs’ arf (Lag, iv. 4 com); Waaet
Acyryga: award Wear atsarewHisear 1, °° alcogrygat
az aad Feat (LMa,i(c). 3, com.). It may be mentioned that, out
of the two manuscripts consulted, one has but the other does not have
the word sz prefixed to THTIAE: and wyTgAt in this last reference.


--- Page 36 ---
COMMENTARIES ON THE ARYABHATIYA  gxxix

long. 79° 30’ E.), for, according to Stryadeva, the equinoctial
midday shadow at that place was 2g argulas . which
corresponds to the latitude of 11°°3.N. This is also sub-
stantiated by the ascensional differences and times of risings
of the signs stated by Stryadeva for the said place. The
distance of that place from the Hindu prime meridian is said
to have been 11 yojanas eastwards.

a on

 

1. Gangai-konda-Co]apuram (‘the city of the Cola king, who
conquered up to the. Ganges’), also called Ganga-konda-puram, is a
town and temple in Trichinopoly district of Tamilnadu. It is located
between Colaroon (a branch of the river Cauveri at its delta region)
and the river Vellar flowing on its two sides and is situated about
six miles from Jayamkonda-Solapuram. It is connected with Udaiyar-
palaiyam by the Chidambaram road, and is one mile distant from the
great Trunk Road running from Tanjore to South Arcot.

Gangai-konda-Colapuram was founded by king Rajendra Cola I
(A.D. 1012-44) who was. called ‘Gangai-konda-Cola’ (lit. ‘The Cola who
conquered up to the Ganges’) and who shifted his capital from Tanjore
to this city, and was known after his name ‘the city of the Cola king,
who conquered up to the Ganges’. This city remained theecApital of the
Cola kings for many years to come. It has now lost its past glory and is
no more than a village. Close to it stand the ruins of one of the most
remarkable but least known temples in Southern India, The temple consists
of one large enclosure, measuring 584 feet by 372 feet. The vimana in
- the centre of the courtyard is a very conspicuous building and strikes the-
eye from a great distance, The pyramid surrounding it reaches a height
of 174 feet, The ruins of six gopuras, or gate-pyramids, surmount
different parts of the building. That over the eastern entrance to
the main enclosure, was evidently once a very fine structure, being built
entirely of stone except at the very top. All the lower part of the
central building is covered with inscriptions.

Gangai-konda-Colapuram was called Gang&pmi in Sanskrit
(Cf. Epigraphia Indica, xv, p. 49). The word Sri-ranga (literally
meaning ‘the stage of the goddess of prosperity’) prefixed to the name
Gangapuri in one of the manuscripts consulted seems to point to the
Tichness and magnificence of this city.


--- Page 37 ---
Pal INTRODUCTION

(4) He wrote his commentary on the Laghu-manasa in A.D.
1248 (i.e., at the age of 57 years). This is inferred from
the fact that Stryadeva has stated the dkruvakas (planetary
positions) for Thursday noon, Caitradi, Saka year 1170.

5. ParameSvara’s commentary

ParameSvara’s commentary on the Aryabhatiya was edited by
H. Kern and printed at Leiden (Holland) in A.D. 1874. It was
reprinted in A.D. 1906 by Udaya Narain Singh along with his Hindi
translation of the Aryabhatiya.

Paramesvara’s commentary sets forth a brief but excellent
exposition of the Aryabhatiya. In writing this commentary the author
has utilized Saryadeva’s commentary, and has quoted from the Sarya-
siddhanta, the Br&hma-sphuta-siddhanta of Brahmagupta, the Brhat-
samhita of Varahamihira, the Sisya-dhi-vrddhida of Lalla, the Trisatika
of §ridhara, and the Lilavati of Bhaskara II. He has also referred to
his Mahabhaskariya-bhasya-vyakhya Siddhantadipika, which was written
sometime after A.D. 1431. His commentary on the Aryabhatiya was
evidently a later work.

Parame$yara hails from Kerala. He lived in the village Aévattha
(identified with modern Alattur) situated on the north bank of the river
Nila (Mal. Bharatappuzha) near the Arabian sea shore. His first
composition was his commientary on the Laghu-Bhaskariya which he
wrote in A.D, 1408 when he was still a student. If we presume that
he was 28 years of age at that time, his date of birth may be fixed at
1380 A.D. His Drgganita was written in A.D. 1431 and his Goladipika
in A.D. 1443.

Paramegvara wrote a number of books on astronomy, astrology
and allied subjects, See Part II, Scholiasts of Bhaskara I.

6.° Yallaya’s notes on Suryadeva’s commentary

Yaliaya has written notes on Stryadeva’s commentary dealing
with the second, third and fourth Padas of the Aryabhajiya. Yallaya’s
commentary on each verse of the Aryabhatiya consists of Suryadeva’s
commentary followed by Yallaya’s notes where necessary. In his notes
Yallaya has sometimes illustrated the rules by giving suitable examples
with solutions.

A manuscript of this commentary exists in the Lucknow University
Library. The colophon at the end of it runs as follows :


--- Page 38 ---
COMMENTARIES ON THE ARYABHATIYA xii

afa slasaathacatasaahqaad sitearfacagaaratard fray sitarcr-
gan qenareaa faafeaar srawctenmeraaea fefearewdereart FAH

The scope of the commentary in the words of its author is as
follows : .

“As the commentary written by Stryadeva Yajva, who had
thorough knowledge of the science of words (i.e., grammar), is
brief, so for the benefit of those astronomers who want to
know the (detailed) meaning of the Ganita, Kalakriya and Gola
Padas (of the Aryabhatiya) composed by Aryabhata, I, learned
Yallaya, son’ of Sridhararya, pupil of Stryacarya son of
Baladitya, well versed in many works on Pafiganita and
proficient in the three branches of astronomy, and who has
command over language by virtue of the boon acquired from
God Siva, will first write those entire explanations of the
Grya-sttras (‘aphorisms in arya metre’) which have been given
by Suryadeva Yajva and then, wherever the explanations are
brief, will supplement them by further explanations and alter-
native illustrative examples,’

ry

From the above passage we learn that Yallaya was a son of
Stidhararya and a pupil of Suryacarya? This Sridhara was different
from the author of the Patiganita and the Trisatika.® And _ this
Suryacirya was the author of: (1) Ganakananda, (2) Daivajiiabharana
and (3) Daivajfia-bhusana and was different from Stiryadeva (b. A.D. 1191),
Suryacdrya’s father Baladitya was also a famous astronomer. He was

 

 

1. rqraereeaeafaar qaaaq asaqt Hata eaTeraey Walaa.
cvaraninasrafentanraate mqfaesat gaara ger qeq
rer FaaIa aaa TA areqt Ha (wea) Ter YAR aq Heer sateara fafiaear
UT at sateqadeat (Ga) Te agartafravafaftsenrardfaar sftaeqezdat-
Teasers steadier giy stanfeagaqataaesty sftaccaeta
facfeaar aar sqrenanfe fafeacfiaqageneratr y fact

2. In his commentary on the Snrya-siddhanta (written in A.D.

1478) Yallaya has called his teacher by the name SUrya-Stri and has

quoted a large number of passages from the astronomical work Daivajiia-
bharaga written by him.

4. Bh, vi


--- Page 39 ---
xlii INTRODUCTION

the'author of a work called Bala-Bhaskariya which has been often quoted
by the commentators hailing from the Andhra State.

As regards the place where the present commentary was written,
Yallaya himself writes :

“This exposition was catefully composed by me in the town
of Skandasome$vara which is situated towards the south-east
of Srifaila.”?

The equinoctial. midday shadow and the equinoctial midday
hypotenuse for Skandasomegvara are given to be 3} angulas and 12,5
angulas, respectively. From these figures the latitude of the place comes
out to be 15° 30’N. approximately. The distance of Skandasomeévara
from the Hindu prime meridian is stated to be 36 yojanas (according to
the reckoning of the Sarya-siddhanta) or 234’, yojanas (according to the
reckoning of the Aryabhatiya),? which corresponds to 4° 5’. As the
commentator applies the corresponding longitude correction to the
planets negatively, it follows that Skandasomesvara was situated 4° 5’ to
the east of the Hindu prime meridian.

Skandasomeégvara was not only the place where this commentary
was written, but it was also the place to which Yallaya actually belonged.
For in his commentary on the Sarya-siddhanta (i. 57-58), Yallaya says :

 

a

1. Hetcearmafertearaalterciet afer: mat aren ProitaT 1 (Comm.
on A, iii. 6).
Srigaila is a temple in the Nandikotkdr taluk of Kurnool
District, Andhra State, situated in latitude 16° 5’ N. and longitude
78° 53’ E, It lies in the midst of malarious jungles and rugged hills on
the northernmost plateau of the Nallamalais, overlooking a deep gorge
through which flows the Krishna river. The temple is 600 feet long by
510,feet broad. The walls are elaborately sculptured with scenes from
the Ramayana and the Mahabh@rata. In the centre stands the shrine
of Mallikarjuna, the name by which God Siva is worshipped there.

2, Comm. on A, iii, 6.

3. Our conclusions agree with the computations made in the
ommentary.


--- Page 40 ---
COMMENTARIES ON THE ARYABHATIYA wliii

“My native country, however, is the town called Skandasomes-
vara which lies towards the south-east of §rigaila.’?

The date of writing the commentary is 1480 A.D., which corres-
ponds to the Kali year 4581 mentioned in the commentary.’ Other
dates mentioned in the commentary are A.D. 1456, AD. 1465,
A.D. 1466 and A.D. 1469.

In the present commentary there are a number of rules and
examples which have been cited from the works of earlier writers.
The sources are generally not mentioned. Some rules, however, can
be easily traced to the Trisatika of Sridhara. Several examples are
borrowed from the commentary of Bhaskara I. Some rules and
examples are Yallaya’s own composition. At one place the commentator
(Yallaya) refers to the people of Andhra and Karnataka, saying that they
call the number 10'° (arbuda) by the denomination Satakofi.

The following tables given by Yallaya in the commentary will be
useful to historians :

~— -

. Table of linear measures
8 paramanus = 1 trasarenu ‘
8 trasarenus = 1 ratharenu *
8 ratharenus = 1 kosa
8 kosas = 1 tilabija
8 tilabijas = - 1 sarsapa
8 sarsapas = 1 yava
8 yavas = 1 angula
12 angulas = 1 .vitasti
2 vitastis = 1 hasta
4 hastas = 1 danda
2000 dandas = 1 krosa
4 krosas = 1 yojana

1, adtateeg fhiacaraafennt feqa; epeeatereags: F

2. Comm, on A, iii. 6.


--- Page 41 ---
xliy INTRODUCTION

2. Table of grain measures
4 kudubas = 1 prastha

4 prasthas = 1 adha
4 adhas = 1 drona
5 dronas = 1 khari

3. Table of gold or silver measures

4 vrihis = 1 guiija
2 guitjas = 1 masake
2 masakas = 1 gumarta
10 gumartas = 1 suvarna
1k suvarnas == 1 kargsa
4 karsas = 1 pala

4. Names of 29 notational places
(1) eka, (2) data, (3) Sata, (4) sahasra, (5) ayuta, (6) laksa, (7) prayuta,
(8) koti, (9) dasakoti, (10) Satakoti, (11) arbuda, (12) nyarbuda,
(13) kharva, (14) maha-kharva, (15) padma, (16) maha-padma, (17) sankha,
(18) maha-sankha, (19) ksoni, (20) maha-ksoni, (21) ksitt, (22) mahd-ksiti,
(23) ksobha, (24) maha-ksobha, (25) Parardha, (26) sagara, (27) ananta,
(28) cintya, and (29) bhari2 .

7. Nilakantia Somayaji’s commentary

This commentary bears the name Maha-bhasya and has been
published in the Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, Nos. 101, 112, 185,
Nilakantha, like Yallaya, has commented only upon the Ganita, Kéla-
Kriya and Gola Padas of the Aryabhatiya,

From the colophon occurring at the end of the commentary on
the Ganita-pada, we have the following information regarding the
commentator (Nilakantha) :

1. His father was called Jataveda, the same being the name of
his maternal uncle also. ,

1. In place of parardha some people, says Yallaya, use the
denomination sankrti. In the list given by Mahavira (A.D. 850), Sankha
and maha-Sankha have been replaced by kgoni and maha-kgoni, res-
pectively, and vice versa. See B. Datta and A,N. Singh, History of
Hindu Mathematics, Part I, p. 13,

 


--- Page 42 ---
COMMENTARIES ON THE ARYABHATIYA alv

2. His younger brother. was named Sankara.

He was a Brahmana, follower of the ASvalayana-sUtra, and
belonged to the Gargya-gotra.

4. His teacher in astronomy was Damodara, son of the com-
mentator Paramesgvara (A.D. 1431); and his teacher in
Vedanta was Ravi, who was probably the same person as the
author of the Acdradipika—a commentary in verse on the
Muhartastaka.

5. He was a native of the village Kunda, which has been
identified with Trkkantiytr in South Malabar, Kerala,

_ In the commentary on verses 12-15 of the Kalakriya-pada, the
commentator writes :

“When 16,68,478 days had elapsed since the beginning of
Kaliyuga, we observed a total eclipse of the Sun; and when
16,81,272 days had elapsed, there occurred an annular eclipse
in Ananta-ksetra.”

The first epoch corresponds to A.D. 1467 and the latter to A.D.
1502. Thus it is evident that this commentary was written after A.D.
1502, From the commentator’s Siddhanta-darpana-vyakhya, we learn
that he was born in December A.D, 1444. Hence at the time of ‘writing
the present commentary he was above 60 years of age.

Nilakantha’s commentary on the Aryabhatiya is a valuable work
as it incorporates the advances made in astronomy up to his time and
contains a good deal of matter of historical interest. There are
“quotations from the works of Varahamihira, Prabhakara, Jaisnava or
Jisnunandana (i.e., Brahmagupta, son of Jisnu), Bhaskara I, Muiijalaka
(same as Mufijala or Maifijula), Stipati, Bhaskara II, Madhava, resident
of the village Safigama ;’ from the Surya-siddhanta, the Siddhanta-
dipika of Paramesvara, Suryadeva’s commentary on the Aryabhatiya,
Govinda-svami’s commentary on the Maha-Bhaskariya, and from his own
works, the Golasara and the Tantra-sahgraha. Reference is also made
to Vrddha-Garga, Garga, Paramarsi, Manittha, Vy4sa, Varttikakara,

ee

1. Sarigama-grama is identified with Iritijalakkuda or Irinnala-
kkuda, near Cochin,


--- Page 43 ---
xlvi INTRODUCTION

Pingala, Bhattapada, Haradatta (same as Haridatta), Damodara,

Kausitaki Netranardyana, and to the Vakyapadiya, the Vaijayanti, the

Vydpti-nirnaya of Parthasarathi Misra, the Laghu-Bhaskariya and Udaya-

divakara’s commentary on the Laghu-Bhaskariya. Passages from some
of these works are also cited.

At one place in the commentary,’ Magadha and Baudhayana are
reported to have stated in their works the amount of precession of
the equinoxes for their times. The following hemistich is ascribed to
the Garga-samhita :°

qaaiatfanteat aoiadisgyead |

which means that if b, k, and h be the base, the upright and the hypo- .
tenuse of a right-angled triangle, then b?-+-k7 =H’,

8. Raghunatha-raja’s commentary

. A manuscript of this commentary is available in the Lucknow Uni-
versity Library, Lucknow. The beginning and end of it are as follows :

ATARITA 1 YATE t

wa sflazarnfacacion « eitereeritvat

© ggrenfaaceangae weerqenfer ear t
arareiteacaraatfirasrearearfade erat
ammarafatea faceangd aracaercifafar
aearay qratiqgqrad aeMaya Tae
aq: aqaatinetagar maretreaerey |
Mer MATT anata der pofedar
a sinreetararafidal afagiseata 1

 

1. Comm, on iii. 10.

2. Comm, on ii. 4, Garga, author of the Garga-samhita (who
was different from Vrddha-Garga), is said to have been born in the
beginning of Kaliyuga. In support of this is adduced the evidence
of ParaSara as also Garga’s own assertion in the Garga-sarnhita.
Vide comm. on iii. 10,


--- Page 44 ---
COMMENTARIES ON THE ARYABHATIYA xivii

HOTA THA MTE*eaHlegarat
faenastiacaag af TSeTET: |

aenae: gaynsafy ATU:

acarensit qufafered fe HOST: |

aed slafrafaaeanenguitster gat Ae
areat HTT TATTUT eft a: Gara feagaraa: |
AeMigaeaslequatr: enara ALATA:
ara: Beaaiea Thales HIATT AMAT AA: 1
BUFTTAHTEMEAt HTSHAAET: |

farai faget sited TEATATAAAT:

eqreaTatsedaea:”, “raremaaitaita”’

End: Wa Warrdsyatna: seta: |. wa afrane aafeara qarfet
arafeatnd qeafanfa: 1 deat warm. gaadtaenaq afery sad
qifera sad adie) oe qarrrmetanegarrarat raat ears raat
sohtay 1 vatft a fagnray aat amreatalft | qaaeaer qaea ueTagaoiy
fazaterinfxrrerraay 1 aated WIeTRAT—

adtfaanisfanantia qaeagarinattaatte | «
Agraeaaninaieetshs aaa Halsercaatwray 1 fet |
Colophon :  stwutzdracrencgtirategyt astranrestaacircatratele-

BUTeATTSTTTA fora: afadfnnneormcrertenfaerfater ATTATATAT FAT
shtaanacianraraeareat argu |

From the opening stanzas of the commentary we learn that
Raghunatha-raja belonged to Karnata (Karnatak or Mysore) and was
a king. His mother’s name was Laksmi, and his genealogy was as
follows :

Venkata
Nagaraja
Kondabhtpa

Raghunatha-raja


--- Page 45 ---
axtvili INTRODUCTION

The following stanza occurring in the commentary' throws light
on the place where the commentator (Raghun&@tha-raja) lived and wrote
the commentary :

aqafafetierracasitazante raat -

ataer tarafagager ara: TART: |

ator sitazalfacisa fayaegrat qa: wag.

ramptraraatarata: area tard: 0

The last two lines mean :

“Here at Ahobila, which is the abode of Parabrahma in the
form of Ramanrsithha, the equinoctial midday shadow (of a
gnomon of 12 afgulas) is to be known as 3 (angulas) and 30
(vyangulas) ; also for the very same place the distance from
the (Hindu) prime meridian is equal to 22 yojanas.’”

This equinoctial midday shadow corresponds to latitude 15° 50’ approx.
This conclusion is corroborated by the following facts :

(i) In an example set in the commentary,? the commentator
gives the Rsine of the local latitude as equal to 962’ 38”,

(ii) At another place in the commentary,‘ the commentator
gives the times of rising of the signs for his local place as

follows :
Sign Time of rising in vinadikas
Aries 243
Taurus . 271
Gemini 311
Cancer 335
Leo 327
Virgo 313

1. under A, iii. 6 (c-d).

2, ‘This translation agrees with Raghunatha-raja’s interpretation.
One vyangula is one-sixtieth of an angula.

3. under 4, iv, 26.
4, Comm. on 4, iv. 27.

 


--- Page 46 ---
COMMENTARIES ON THE ARYABHATIYA xlix

In the commentary on verse 6(c-d) of the K@lakriya-pada, the
local circumference of the Earth at Ahobila is given to be 31624
yojanas, so that the distance 22 yojanas of that place from the (Hindu)
prime meridian corresponds to 1° 40’. Further, in an example solved
in the commentary under verse 10 of the Kalakriya-pada, the longitude
correction for Ahobila has been applied negatively. It follows that
Ahobila lay 1° 40’ towards the east of the Hindu prime meridian.

From what has been said above, we find that Ahobila, the native
place of the commentator Raghunatha-raja, was situated approximately
in latitude 15° 50’ N and longitude 1° 40’ E of the Hindu prime meridian.
According to the verse quoted above, it was the seat of the Laksmi-
nrsimha temple. So, it is the same Abhobila as is situated in Kurnool
district, Andhra State? .

 

 

 

1. It should be noted that the number 31624 yojanas accords to
the yojana-reckoning of Aryabhata I, whereas the number 22 yojanas
accords to the yojana-reckoning of the Surya-siddhadnta. The latter
number, when reduced to the yojana-reckoning. of Aryabhata I, would
become 14% yojanas.

2. Ahobila is a village and temple in the Kurnool District of
Andhra State, situated in latitude 15° 8’ N and longitude 78° 45’ E on
the Nallamalais. It is about 34 miles from Nandyal railway station,
22 miles from Nandyal to Allagadda by road and 12 miles from
Allagadda to Ahobila by cart or on foot.

The temple at Ahobila is the most sacred Vaiapava shrine
in the District. It has three parts, namely : Diguva (lower) Ahobila
temple at the foot of the hills, Yeguva (upper) Ahobila temple about
four miles higher up, and a small shrine on the summit. The first
is the most interesting as it contains beautiful reliefs of scenes from
the Ram@yana on its walls and on the two great stone porches which
stand in front of it, supported by pillars 8 feet in circumference, hewn
out of the rock.

It is said that in ancient times Ahobila was the capital of the
demon king Hiranyakasipu, whose son Prahlada was saved from the wrath
of his father by God Nrsimha at this very place.

There are three hills at Ahobila, viz., Garudadri, Vedadri and
Acalacchaya-meru. The commentator Raghunatha-raja has remembered
God Nrsithha, Lord of Garudari, at the commencement of his commen-
tary and has sought His protection,

Ahobila, as stated above, is now in Andhra State, but it
appears from the commentary that in the time of Raghunatha-raja it
formed part of Karnataka of which he was the king.

A. Bh. vil


--- Page 47 ---
ll INTRODUCTION

‘In the commentary:on -verse:6(c-d) of the Kalakriya-pada, 1519 is
mentioned as the current Saka year. This corresponds to A.D. 1597
and is evidently the time of writing‘the commentary. The same year
is mentioned at other places’ in the commentary also.

The present commentary is based on those of Bhaskara I and
Stryadeva. It goes deep into explanatory details and is, on the whole,
a very valuable work. The number of quotations from anterior works
is large but the commentator refers only toa few of them by name.
Amongst these may be mentioned the names of the Brahma-siddhanta,
the Soma-siddhaénta, the Strya-siddhanta, the Patica-siddhantika, the
Bhaskara-bhasya (ie,, Bhaskara ’s commentary on the Aryabhatiya),
the Laghu-Bhaskariya, the Trisatika, the Utpala-parimala, the Siddhanta-
Sekhara, ‘the Lilavati, the Siddhdnta-siromani, and Mallikarjuna Stri’s
commentary on the Sisya-dhi-vrddhida of Lalla, Amongst the authors
mentioned are Wrddha-Garga, Garga, ParaSara, Virabhadra, Vasistha,
Devala, Sitharaja, Varahamihira, Brahmagupta, Lallacarya, and. Maiiju-
lacarya, Bhaskara I has-been called Bhdsyakara (‘author.of the Bhasya’).

The commentary contains a large number of solved examples.
Forty-one of these examples have been taken from the commentary of
Bhaskara I, fifteen from the commentary of SUryadeva, and some from
the works of«Bhaskara II.

9. Commentary of Madhava, son of Virtipaksa
From the following passage occurring in the beginning of

Madhava’s commentary on the Brhajjataka of Varahamihira, we learn
that a commentary on the Aryabhatiya, giving rationales of the rules
and illustrative examples, was also written by him:

mraamam ater fereqeaaaaraa:

mraasatfrarentss TIAAAAEAA: 11

mraragyciger fags TATA |

TAFTMAZIA StH FAT AT: ATA

arcaa Faas afgerar ager 1

drat seat a aeTT Mera aanraey

 

1. See comm. on A, iii. 10, iv. 4, and iv. 5.


--- Page 48 ---
COMMENTARIES ON THE ARYABHATIYA’ hi
aurgfafeciet gruerragashs +
aqeaseean fagia: cet FEAT ht
qevaramateraredtanrarea fatter &
drat atasatara sfterrearsara etc.
The above passage shows that—

(i) Madhava, the commentator, was a Brahmana of Atreya
Gotra, and belonged to the family (anvaya) of Vantula,
(ii) His father’s name was VirUpaksa.
(iii) His commentary on the Aryabhatiya was his earliest work.
(iv) His other commentaries were on the Ndrada-samhita and

on the Laghu-jatake and the Brhajjataka of Varahamihira.

As the commentator himself says in the last two lines of the above
passage, his commentary on the Brhajjataka was in Telugu. This shows
that he belonged to the Andhra State. It is not known whether his
commentary on the Aryabhatiya was composed in Sanskrit or in Telugu,

10, BhUtivisnu’s commentary

A manuscript of Bhiitivisnu’s commentary on the Aryabhatiya,
entitled Bhatapradipa, exists in the Royal Library at Berlin? The
concluding verse of the commentary on the Gitika-pada (as recons-
tructed from the corrupt reading in the manuscript) runs as follows :—

aaa gd aaifaqandta engage a
germatafnren fagiens yfafaon: aadtafeery 1

Bhotivisnu is the author of a commentary on the Sarya-siddhanta
also, of which an incomplete manuscript (containing a few pages in

 

 

1. A Descriptive Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the
Government Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras, 1918, Vol. 24, Ms.
No, 13835.

2. Catalogue No. 834, De Handschriften-verzeichnisse der Konig-
lichen Bibliothek, Erster Band, Verzeichniss der Sanskrit-Handschriften,
by Weber, Berlin, 1853, p. 232. ,

There is also another manuscript of this commentary in the
Anup Sanskrit Library, Bikaner. See Cat, No, .4447,.


--- Page 49 ---
hii INTRODUCTION

the beginning) exists in the Lucknow University Library, Lucknow.! It
begins with :

wrafe gen quact afer cerateradte 1

aftinahieatien’d 8 stasa® afera

Ta faaferttert Ses AETafe: |

gfafaoyge: steraeg qsiteqeory 1

yfafaonrgy ga stssaer gai wa: |

sfawrmaat es: sftasgeta apa:
sarfaerten aad ape
faareastererea & yyferfaeriy: 1
gfeaenryaitreet n-
CRAG Hed:

aa fagrarnert sitafreg —sarracater etc,

“O Goddess—dedicated to bestowing favour on humble devotees,
enable me to have firmer devotion towards God Visnu who resides at
Kari-sikhari (i.e., the Elephant Mountain or Kajiici).

“There was a learned and virtuous Devaraja, the crest-jewel of
the lineage of, Garga, the son of Bhutivispu and an ornament of the
terrestrial world. His eldest son, Bhutivisnpu, was regarded as the
best amongst the wise and intelligent and was honoured with the epithet
‘Srimat’, That Bhutivisnu, who I am, has the desire to comment on
the Siddhanta acquired from Strya (i.e., Stirya-siddhanta). May God
Visnu, the crest-jewel of the Hasti-giri (ie., the- Elephant Mountain), :
accomplish that desire of this ignorant self.”

The above passage shows that Bhutivisnu belonged to the lineage
of Garga and that he was the son of Devaraja and the grandson of
his own namesake Bhitivisnu. This Devaraja was a different person
from Devaraja, the author of the Kuttaka@ra-siromani, as the former
belonged to the lineage of Garga and the latter to the lineage of Atri.

BhUtivisnu’s commentary on the Aryabhatiya was written earlier
than his commentary on the Strya-siddhanta, which is evident from the

 

 

1, Accession No, 47070.


--- Page 50 ---
COMMENTARIES ON THE ARYABHATIYA liii

reference of the former in the latter. For, commenting on SaSi, i. 11-12,
Bhitivisnu says :

war a Hema PENTA eTT—
gd fg aeaagarwanta em: aTaaraa g eaefer v’ Efe

The initial few pages of Bhutivisnu’s commentary on the Surya-
siddhanta, which are available in the Lucknow University Library,
Lucknow, do not throw light on the time and place of Bhuativisnu.
But they do contain numerous references to Sripati and quotations
from his Siddhanta-iekhara, which shows that he lived posterior to
Sripati (A.D. 1039). Similarly, his devotion to God Visnu residing on
the Elephant Mountain (i.e., Kaiici) suggests that he belonged to
Tamilnadu, in South India,

11. Ghatigopa’s commentary

Two manuscripts of this commentary exist in the Kerala
University Oriental Research Institute and Manuscripts Library,
Trivandrum.}

This commentary begins thus :
TaTad a arat aw aftgatety aerate 1
qatartarimengary sraatseragg |
gfareiefeft 1 mE | TR STETETAT, AAS HTASTTTT
aaferceftfn 1 aSafasrgntererfor weratoreerrrerdterratent ht | at THY BA

earatafaderrerdt 1 teres aca agufzderarhths 1 aaanterciferat seared
AA TAT TAMATLATAATAA: | TaMTaNEATATAT FAA:

It ends thus ;

adudtd areat sf qa eqarqar siti aTared aay aa gafad
aeaieat ardediafate emia sratft | war ary 1 Refer erat @ faeqerd
waft 1 wea sfanoae dereifeenfettd a: ged A aTAA: BRAT:
sorata aalfr 1 ata a) afeqeercren areaet samraifa wttft a Frowret

qeargal acon dfenrafeawneititeged waft 1 Ta TaTAyaT |
quay caranagign fagiaat |
gaarandiaeg afeefsaq eaigd Fat 0

1. Mss. Nos. 13305-A and T. 736,

 


--- Page 51 ---
live INTRODUCTION

Terra fiere: wearin tare: 1:

weit fagrr Aete qeegarar: 1

elrenfrerten arenas fat: |

meee THAT HE gor celle. wae
sf. Meroe: aaa 1

The closing verses of the commentary show that Ghatigopa was.
a devotee of God Padmanabha and a Pupil of Paramegvara. This.
Paramesvara, however, was different from his namesake, the author of.
the Drgganita (A.D, 1431), for, according to K.V. Sarma, Ghatigopa,,
in his smaller Malayalam commentary on the Aryabhatiya (see below),.
quotes from the Paiicabodha of Putumana Somayaji, and. Puotumana.
Somayaji, according to K.V. Sarma, lived between A.D. 1675 and
A.D. 1750, i.e.; more than two centuries later than Paramesvara,. anthor:
of the. Drgganita.

K.V. Sarma is: of the opinion that this: Ghatigopa: is’ the same
person as Prince Godavarma Koyittampuran (A.D. 1810-60), a member
of the scholarly family of Kilamanoor and a resident of Trivandrum,
who bore the appellation ‘“Manikkaran’ (=clockman) (in Malayalam),
equivalent to ‘Ghatigopa’ (in Sanskrit),

12,. Kodandarkma’s (A.D. 1807-83) commentary.

A: complete manuscript of Kodandarima’s commentary. on: the
kalakriya-pada. of the Aryabhatiya, in Sanskrit verses along with Telugu.
meaning, exists in the Government Oriental Manuscripts. Library, .
Madras,’ It is called Aryabhatatantra-ganita.

Kodandarama is also the author of a work called: Aryabhata-

vani,.which was meant to be a Sequel to the Aryabhatiya. 8. .Kuppnu-
swami Sastri describes this work as follows :

“A treatise: in stanzas of the arya metre dealing: with the:
Advaita-Vedanta, By Kodandarama of Kotikulapudi faasily;
He states that he adds a fourth Pada to the three Padas of
Aryabhata, viz., Ganita, Kala and Gola, wherein everything
relating to calculation is explained, and’ that’ in the fourth

2 eee eee

1. Ms. No. R, 371 (0)..


--- Page 52 ---
COMMENTARI&S“ON THE ARYABHATIYA ly

‘Pada called. Ananda-pada, the nature of the Supreme Brahman
tis explained.’”!

(b) Commentaries in Telugu

13. Kodandarama’s commentary

Kodandarama wrote a commentary in Telugu also. It is on the
first three Padas (viz., Gitika, Ganita and Kalakriya) only, and bears the
name Sudhataranga.,

This commentary has been edited by V. Lakshminarayana Sastri
and published in Madras Government Oriental Series (No. CKXXIX)
in 1956,

‘14. Virupaksa’s commentary

A manuscript of this commentary exists in the Oriental Manu-
scripts Library, Mysore?

(c) Commentaries in Malayalam
15. Krsnadasa’s commentary
A manuscript of Krsnadasa’s commentary covering the Gitikapada
occurs. in the collection of K.V. Sarma. The beginning and end of it
run as follows : .
‘Beginning : sitywert aaeteal aareqeal geez: 1 °
dat sarafegereg arf wediscanraata 1
MAANTHAT ATAFATARTTT |
sqtaed grat varia gatas 1
| aargqesfag aoq sarqannd eerrameTTATd sfeega eaitfremeatr?
FA taragsiag qq etc.
End: ag whe § mreafae ava Metwfirenh. gar fraaria |
Colophon : aemitfagamran tfadd outage 1
Aeiemaraitea _uresgd WaT“
sfa aasitfrgarrat qarcatt

te:

 

1, Triennial Catalogue of the Govt. Oriental Manuscripts Library,
Madras, ‘Vol, IM, ‘Patt-I, Sanskrit A, Madras, 1922, Ms, No. R.
2156 (a),

2. Ms, No. B, 573.


--- Page 53 ---
iyi INTRODUCTION

Krsnadasa is identified with Koccu-Krsnan Agan (A.D. 1756-1812),
of the family of Netumpayil in the Tiruvalla taluk of South Kerala,
well known in Malayalam literary circles as the author of several
poetical works, He is also the author of a number of astrological
works in Malayalam,?

16. Krsna’s commentary _

A manuscript of Aryabhatiya-vyakhya, a commentary in
Malayalam, entitled Bhasayam Krsna-tika, exists in the library of the
India Office, London.? It begins with the words :

wrdeerania aad areata

More details regarding this commentary are not known and it» is
difficult to say whether the author of this commentary was the same
person as Krsnadasa or different from him.

17.18. Two commentaries by Ghatigopa

In addition to his commentary in Sanskrit (already noticed),
Ghatigopa wrote two commentaries in Malayalam, both on the Ganita,
Kalakriya and Gola Padas only. The larger commentary extends to
1850 granthas (1 grantha==32 letters), and the smaller one to 1200
granthas,

Of the larger commentary, there exist two manuscripts (Nos, C.
2333-A and T. 157 B) in the Kerala University Oriental Research

Institute and Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum, The beginning and end
of it are as follows :

Beginning : 42 ariweranty awitfagaanfafesrt sare Stee aiteanfafc.
agra imag saafafeace aaqeeaafaaanger afraTeea Fe
fennadd Mena argarnfree Rese Aq Mead
arefeReg—mereefin etc,

End ; aatarat aafa eat qeafacaredte-
warataifaacnfad afecd cacti |
fagiet & fageaaa: equa ae.
waraeatentita Tawa: ager: fayna u

1. For details, see K. V. Sarma, A history of the Kerala school
of Hindu astronomy, pp. 74-75,

2 Ms. No, 6273.

 


--- Page 54 ---
COMMENTARIES ON THE ARYABHATIYA vii
aelala faucet arerearafata: |
aE THATAET Tat Tafast WAT
MAMTA AATAT |
Of the smaller commentary, there are three manuscripts (Nos.
11014, L. 1334 and T. 1o7-A) in the Kerala University Oriental
Research Institute and Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum, and one (No,

542-B) in the Government Sanskrit College Library, Tripunithura, This
commentary begins thus :

aimanaagy qaftgenissen ve ghefaaniattena aftad ateg-
a Fess TIAA Ata Ya Slee Tetaanesag faalieanfars
wary — aURUA tc.
The commentary on the last two verses is in Sanskrit and. not in
Malayalam. It ends with the following sentence :
aaa ay afeageeataea wea aeaganandiit alfa a facet
apaadt asa tfgsrgiersnaa wader |
which is exactly the same as in his Sanskrit commentary.
The colophon to Ganita-pada runs thus :
arredtaeariens aa aforariretstareate |
afag Fata Stet feoaa qet: aneafaq un

aforaqrzarat TAA |

The colophon to Gola-p@da runs thus :
qeteacrraremaigniaagtaa |
Qaatdediaes aq fafeag sored vat
TeaTafsrn: wea ataa: |
aeat fagra State qorerngarran: 0
qermafware aeateaafate: 1
Vega TATA Tat Aafadt Wag
fa mMaqtaHTaT Aaa |
It is noteworthy that some of the verses occurring towards the
end of all the three commentaries written by Ghatigopa are exactly

A. Bh, viii


--- Page 55 ---
boi : INTRODUSTION

the same and prove beyond déubt the comfion authorship of the three
commentaries,

(d) Commentary in Marathi
19. Asonymots commentary in Marathi
A cotamentary (rather a translation) in Marathi exists in the
Bombay University Library, Bombay. The name of the author is not
ménitioned.
6.7. Works based on the Aryabhatiya

Of the works written on the basis of the Aryabhatiya, mention
may be made of the following :

1. The works of Bhaskara I
For details see Introduction to Part H of this Series, pp. xxx ff.

-2. The Karana-ratna of Deva (A.D. 689) son of Gojanma

A manuscript of this work exists in the Kerala University
Oriental Research Institute and Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum.”

The Karana-raina is a calendrical work in eight chapters,
containing in all 183 verses. In the second opening stanza, the
author says : ‘

“Having taken a deep plunge into the entire ocean of the
Aryabhata-sastra with the boat of intellect, I have acquired
this jewel, the Karana-ratna, adorned by the rays of all the
planets.’”?

This work, though essentially based on the teachings of the
Aryabhatiya, is highly influeneed by the Khanda-khadyaka of Brahma-
gupta, It adopts a number of verses from the Laghu-Bhaskariya and
the Khanda-khadyaka,

1. Ms. No. 334,
2. No. T.559.

3, ardwenteasata afearar ecafesraara i
wee atanfaareysted Huey u


--- Page 56 ---
WORKS BASED ON THe ARYABHATIYA lit

This is the earliest work of the Aryabhata school that states the
precession of the equinoxes and. the so-called Sak@bda, Manuyuga and
Kalpa corrections.

3. The Graha-cara-nibandhana of Haridatta (or Haradatta)

This calendrical work was edited by K.V. Sarma and published
by the Kuppuswami Sastri Research Institute, Mylapore, Madras,
in 1954.

The work is in three chapters and states simplified rules and tables
for finding the true longitudes of the planets and therefrom the naksatra
and fithi, two of the five elements of the Hindu calendar.

This work does not prescribe any bija correction to the mean
longitudes of the planets, although it is conjectured that Haridatta was
the author of the so-called Sakabda correction.

A. The Sisya-dhi-vrddhida of Lalla (or Ralla)

The text of this work was published by Sudhakara Dvivedi at
Benaras in A.D. 1886. In the opening stanzas, the author explains the
scope of the work as follows :

“That science of astronomy which, as told by Aryabhata, is
“difficult to comprehend is being set forth by Lalla in such a
way as to be easily understood by students. «

“Although having mastered the Sastra composed by Aryabhata,
his pupils (or followers) have written astronomical tantras, but
they have not been able to describe the methods properly.
I shall, therefore, state the procedures stated by him in proper
sequence.” -

In the penultimate stanza of the Grahaganita part of the same
work, he again says :

 

1. sraaiduatad gfard edtetwat at a-
feocormmafadtad cage aeaa etafesa
fasta oreanTa aero
aarfn wafer gather aétafered: 1
aaa Tay arageixaed:
HH TA PAGAT; PUTCTZTHA Nl


--- Page 57 ---
Ix INTRODUCTION

“Lalla .,, has composed this tantra which yields the same
results as the Aryabhata-siddhanta (j.e., the Aryabhatiya).”

Regarding his parentage, the author (Lalla) himself writes :

arelatrergers FaaveT ae AETS THAET ASAT |
airqerisata stamtargicefeaiaa sft sfaa: gfaeary u
Mee AeA aaa eeTiRATA: senfercrmaTatzaer TENT: A
Heyes TaTTATT METAS Aga RAATT HIT AAA

This shows that he was a son of Samba, popularly known as Bhatta

Trivikrama, and a grandson of the learned scholar Taladhvaja, and that
he was a Brahmana,

Chronologically, Lalla comes after Bhaskara I and Brahmagupta,
but in the absence of any definite evidence his date could not be fixed
so far. On the basis of a passage (Sake nakhabdhirahite etc.) generally
ascribed to him, it is conjectured that he lived about A.D. 7482 But
this date is doubtful, because the said passage does not lead to any
definite conclusion. There is, however, no doubt that Lalla lived
sometime between A.D. 665 and A.D. 904. The former is the date of
the Khanda-khadyaka on which Lalla wrote a commentary, and the
latter the date of Vatesvara who has utilized the Sisya-dhi-vrddhida
of Lalla in writing his Siddhanta.

Lalla’s places of birth and activity are also unknown. . But the
following example, which is the only example of this kind occurring in
the Sisya-dhi-vrddhida,? probably refers to the place where he lived :

“Knowing that the sum of the Rsines of the latitude and the
colatitude is 1308’ and that the difference of the same is

538’, say what are the Rsines of the latitude and the colatitude
here,’*

——_.

 

1, See, for example, introduction to P. C. Sengupta’s English
translation of the Khanda-khadyaka, pp. xxvi-xxvii.

2. II, xii. 22,

3. APATASTTaT aeATATIT ARTA EAT |
aqyrfavar fart areas’ fra eitsz 1


--- Page 58 ---
WORKS BASED ON THE ARYABHATIYA Ixi

If x and y denote the two quantities, then
x=923'=Rsin (15° 34’) approx.
y==385’=Rsin (6° 26’) approx.

Thus the latitude of the place referred to in the above example ‘is
either 15° 34’ or 6° 26’. The latter alternative is impossible as the
circle of latitude 6° 26’ does not cross the Indian continent, So we
infer that Lalla lived in latitude 15° 34’ N.

There are also reasons to believe that Lalla belonged to
Latadesa (i.e., Gujarat). For, in his Sisya-dhi-vrddhida, Lalla has made
a special reference to the ladies of the Lata country. He has compared
the half-phased Moon with the forehead of a lady of the Lata country
(lati). Although the Sisya-dhi-vrddhida claims to set forth the teach-
ings of the Aryabhafiya, the impact of the teachings of Brahmagupta
on this work is also visible. Two features of the Sisya-dhi-vrddhida
deserve special notice : (i) arrangement of subject matter under two
distinct heads —Grahaganita (dealing with astronomical calculations) and
Goladhyaya (dealing with the celestial sphere, cosmogony, astronomical
instruments, etc.), and (ii) language. This arrangement has been
followed by VateSvara (A.D. 904) in his Siddhanta, by Bhaskara II
(A.D, 1150) in his Siddhdnta-Siromanl, by Jianaraja (A.D. 1503) in
his Siddhanta-sundara, and other later writers. The language used
‘by Lalla is, at places, highly poetic and appealing. Some of his
expressions and similies are so nice that posterior writers could not
resist copying them. One can easily find a number of passages in the
works of VateSvara, Sripati and Bhaskara II which have been copied
from the Sisya-dhi-vrddhida of Lalla.

5, The Karana.prakasa of Brahmadeva (A.D. 1092)

This calendrical work was edited by Sudhakara Dvivedi
_ together with his own commentary. The epoch used in this work is
A.D, 1092,

This work holds an important place amongst the calendrical
works. It makes use of the bija correction prescribed by Lalla, and
tithis calculated from this work differ by about 2 to 3 ghatis, being in
excess, from those calculated from the parameters of the Aryabhatiya,
This work was in use in South India, particularly in Maharastra,


--- Page 59 ---
lai INTRODUCTION

amongst Vaisnavas, who preferred the 11th tith! calculated frem this
work. For details, see Diksita’s Bh@ratiya-Jyotisa-sastra (Marathi),
pp. 240-42.

6. The Bhatatulya of Damodara

The epoch used in this work is A.D, 1417. The author
Damodara was a son of Padmanabha (c, A.D. 1400) and a grandson of
Narmada (c. A.D, 1375). Use of Lalla’s bija correction is madg in
this work also. A manuscript of this work exists in the Deccan
College Library, Poona. The second stanza therein runs as follows :

_ “J, Damodara, bowing to the lotus-like feet of my teacher
Padmanabha, write, for the pleasure of the learned, this work,
which will yield the same results as those of Aryabhata, by
making use of the pratyabda-suddhi method.”?

For details see Diksita, ibid., pp. 354-56.

7. . The Karana-paddhati of Putamana Somayaji (A.D. 1732)

This work has been published in Trivandrum Sanskrit Series
(No. 126), and the Madras Government Oriental Series (No. 98). The
latter contains two Malayalam commentaries also.

8. The Aryabhata-siddhanta-tulya-karana by Virasitahagapaka son of
Kasiraja
Three manuscripts of this work occur in Anup Sanskrit Library,
Bikaner.

6.8. Transmission to Arab

The Aryabhatiya was taken to Arab where it was translated into
Arabic by Abul Hasan Ahwazi under the title Aryabhata (misread as
Arajbahara or Arajbahaz), The Arabians misunderstood the exact
significance of the title of the work and wrongly thought that it meant
‘one thousandth part’.?

——.

 

1. aptez: shyeaarararefard farce woTeT 1
maygusssicer ed faat yess FO TOA
2. Mss. Nos. 4448, 4449 and 4450,
3. See Arab aur Bharat ke sambandha, by Maulana Saiyad
Sulaiman Nadavi, translated into Hindi by Ram Chandra Varma, pub.
by Hindystani Academy, Allahabad, 1930, p, 113,


--- Page 60 ---
ARYABHATA-SIDDHANTA init
(9. THE ARYABHATAsSIDDHANTA

- From the writings of Varahamihira (died A.D. 587), Brahmagupta
(A.D. 628), Bhaskara I (A.D. 629), Govinda-svami (ninth century),
Mallikarjuna Suri (A. D. 1178), Ramakrsna Aradhya (1472 A. D.),
Maithila Candeévara, Bhiidhara (A.D. 1572) and Tamma Yajva (A.D.
1599), it is now established beyond doubt that Aryabhata I, the author
of the Aryabhofiya, wrote at least one more work on astronomy which
was known as Aryabhata-siddhanta. Unlike the Aryabhatiya in which
the day was measured from one sunrise to the next, this work reckoned
the day from one midnight to the next as was done in the Surya-
siddhanta. The astronomical parameters and methods given in the
Aryabhata-siddhanta differed in some cases from those of the
Aryabhatiya. The important differences between the two works have
been noted by Bhaskaral in Chapter VIE of his Maha-Bhaskariya
Some of the typical methods and the astronomical instruments des-
cribed in the Aryabhate-siddhanta have been mentioned by Matlikarjuna
Suri, Tammia Yajva, Ramakrsna Aradhya and others in their commen-
taries on the Surya-siddhanta. The astronomical parameters and
methods ascribed to the Arpyabhata-siddhanta are generally the same aa
those found in Varahatmihira’s version of the Sarya-siddhanta and the
Sumati-mahatantra of Acarya Sumaii of Nepal, which was based on thé
Surya-siddhanta, It appears that the Aryabhata-siddhanja was an
independent work like the Aryabhafiya and that it bore the same relation
to the earlier Sarya-siddhanta as the Aryabhatiya bore to the earlier
Svayambhuva:siddhania ; and that the Sarya-siddhanta summarized by
Vardthamihira was the one anonymously revised by Layadeva in the
light of the Aryabhata-siddhanta. This is, perhaps, the feason why
both Aryabhata I and Latadeva are sometimes referred to as the authors
of the Surya-siddhanta.

71. The Aryabhata-siddhanta and the Aryabhatiya

The following tables exhibit the main differences between the
astronomical parameters of the Aryabhatiya and the Aryabhata-siddhanta
according to Bhaskara I.


--- Page 61 ---
driv INTRODUCTION

Table 1. Diameters and distances of planets in yojanas
eee

Aryabhatiya — Aryabhata-siddhanta

 

Earth’s diameter 1050 1600
Sun’s diameter 4410 6480
Moon’s diameter 315 480
Sun’s distance 459585 689358
Moon’s distance 34377 51566

circumference of the sky 216000 324000
revolutions of the Moon

Ce

The numbers in the second and third columns are in the ratio

2:3, approximately. This is due to the fact that the measures of yojana
employed in the two works are in the ratio 3 : 2,

Table 2. Civil days, Omitted lunar days, and Revolutions of Sighrocca

of Mercury and Jupiter in a period of 43,20,000 years
enn!
Aryabhatiya Aryabhata-siddhanta

a

‘Civil days 1,57,79,17,500 1,57,79,17,800
Omitted lunar days 2,50,82,580 2,50,82,280
Revolutions of Sighrocca of Mercury 1,79,37,020 1,79,37,000
Revolutions of Jupiter 3,64,224 3,64,220
wee“

It may be pointed out that the difference of 300 days between the
civil days of the two works was so adjusted that both the works indi«
cated the same epoch at the end of the Kali year 3600 mentioned in
the Aryabhatiya, Since 3600 years = 1,57,79,17,500/ 1200 = 13,14,931°25
days according to the Aryabhatiya and =1577917800/1200 = 1314931°50
days according to the Aryabhata-siddhanta, the Kali year 3600 ended
exactly on Sunday, March 2l, A.D. 499, at mean noon at Lanka or
Ujjayini, according to both the works of Aryabhata I.

Table 3. Longitudes of the planets’ apogees (or aphelia) in 499 A.D.

 

Planet Aryabhatiya Aryabhata-siddhanta
- Sun 78° 80°

Mars , 118° 110°
‘Mercury 210° 220°
Jupiter 180° 160°

Venus 90° 80°

Saturn 236° 240°

a eee


--- Page 62 ---
ARYABHATA-SIDDHANTA izyv

Table 4. Dimensions of planets’ manda epicycles

 

 

Aryabhatiya Aryabhata-siddhanta
odd quadrant even quadrant
Sun 13° 30’ 13° 30° 14°
Moon 31° 30’ 31° 30’ 31°
‘Mars 63° 81° 70°
Mercury 31° 30’ 22° 30° 28°
Jupiter 31° 30’ 36° 32°
Venus 18° 9° 14
Saturn 40° 30’ 58° 30’ 60°

———— eee

The circumference of a planet's concentric or deferent (or mean
orbit) is supposed to be of 360 units (called degrees) in length and the
above dimensions are on the same scale.

Table 5. Dimensions of planets’ sighra epicycles

 

Aryabhatiya Aryabhata-siddhanta
odd quadrant even quadrant
Mars 238° 30° 229° 30° 234°
Mercury . 139° 30° 130° 30’: 132°
Jupiter 72° 00’ 67° 30’ 72°
Venus 265° 30’ 256° 30’ 260° '
Saturn 40° 30’ 36°00" 40°

SS

72. The astronomical instruments and special methods of the Aryabhata-
siddhanta

Ramakrsna Aradhya (A.D. 1472) has quoted a set of 34 verses
(composed in anustubh metre) from the chapter of the Aryabhata-siddhanta
dealing with the astronomical instruments. The instruments described
in these verses are: (1) Chaya-yantra (‘the shadow instrument’),
(2) Dhanuryantra (‘the semi-circle’), (3) Yasti-yantra, (4) Cakra-yantra
(‘the whole circle’), (5) Chatra-yantra (‘the umbrella’), (6) Water
instruments, (7) Ghatika-yantra, (8) Kapala-yantra, and (9) the gnomon,2
Of these instruments, some were indeed devised by Aryabhata I, The

 

 

1. For details see K.S. Shukla, ‘Aryabhata I’s astronomy with
midnight day-reckoning’, Ganita, Vol. 18, No. 1, pp. 83-105,
ABh, ix


--- Page 63 ---
Ixvi INTRODUCTION

gnomon (as described by Aryabhata I) and the water instruments have
been generally attributed to him. It is in connection with these
instruments that the commentators of the Surya-siddhanta have remem-
bered him.

Mallikarjuna Suri (A.D. 1178), Ramakrsna Aradhya (A.D. 1472) and
Tamma Yajva (A.D. 1599) have referred also to some special methods of
the Aryabhata-siddhanta. Of these methods, one relates to the approximate
determination of time from the shadow of the gnomon. The method
is interesting and also unique as it does not occur in any other known
work on Indian astronomy. It may be briefly described as follows :

When the Sun is in Scorpio, Capricorn or Aquarius, and it is
within 2 ghafis from noon, set up a gnomon of 9 digits on the east-west
line in such a way that the tip of its shadow may fall on the north-
south line, Then the digits of the distance of the gnomon from the
intersection of the east-west and north-south lines would approximately
give the ghatis to elapse before noon or elapsed since noon (according
as the observation is made before noon or after noon),

7-3. Popularity of the Aryabhata-siddhanta and the Khanda-khadyaka
of Brahmagupta :

The Aryabhata-siddhanta was a popular work and was studied
throughout India, It was mentioned in the sixth century by
Varahamihira of Kapitthaka (near Ujjayini), in the seventh
century by Brahmagupta of Bhinmal (in Rajasthan) and Bhaskara I
of Valabhi (in Kathiawar), in the ninth century by Govinda-svami
of Kerala, in the twelfth century by Mallikarjuna-Suri of Andhra and
Maithila-Candesvara of Banaras in Uttar Pradesh, in the fifteenth century
by Ramakrsna-Aradhya of Andhra, and in the sixteenth century by
Bhidhara of Kampilya (modern Kampil, twenty-eight miles north-east
of Fatehpur in the Farrukhabad district, Uttar Pradesh) and Tamma-
Yajva of Andhra.

There are reasons to believe that in the seventh century the
popularity of this work in north India was at its highest peak and it
was used not only as a text book of astronomy but: also in everyday
calculations such as those pertaining to marriage, nativity etc.
The celebrated Brahmagupta who, in his youth, was a_ bitter
critic of Aryabhata I was so much impressed by its popularity that he


--- Page 64 ---
ARYABHATA-SIDDHANTA levii

could not resist the temptation of bringing out an abridged edition of
this work under an attractive title, ‘Food prepared with sugarcandy’
(Khanda-khadyaka). It was so much liked in some parts of India that
it is in use even today.

Brahmagupta was not in complete agreement with the teachings
of Aryabhata I. So he planned his Khanda-khadyaka in two parts. In
Part I he summarized the teachings of the Aryabhata-siddhanta without
making any alteration, modification or addition (but rectifying one or
two rules whose inaccuracy was obvious to him); and in Part II he
stated the corrections and modifications which had to be applied to Part I
in order to get accurate results. In the opening stanzas of the two
parts, Brahmagupta himself says :

(Part I): “Having bowed in reverence to God Mahadeva, the cause
of creation, maintenance and destruction of the world, I
set forth the Khanda-khadyaka which yields the same results
as the work of Aryabhata.

“As it is generally not possible to perform calculations
pertaining to marriage, nativity, and so on, every day by
the work of Aryabbata, hence this smaller work giving the
same results.”

(Part I): “‘As the process of finding the true longitudes. of the planets
as given by Aryabhata does not make them agree with
observation, so I shall speak of this process (now).”

A sad consequence of the composition of the Khanda-khadyaka
was that the original work of Aryabhata I on which it was based was
lost. The Khanda-khadyaka, however, received, wide acclamation and,
though it was a calendrical work, a large number of commentaries were
written on it. Amongst the commentators. of this work were Bala-
bhadra, whose commentary (fika) has been mentioned by Al-Birini
(A.D. 973-1048); Prthtdaka (A.D. 860), whose commentary (vivarana)
has been edited by P. C. Sengupta; Lalla, whose commentary (Khanda-
khadyaka-paddhati) has been mentioned by Amaraja (c. A.D. 1200) ;
Bhattotpala (A. D. 968), whose commentary (vivrti) has been edited
by Bina Chatterjee ; Varuna (c. A. D. 1040), whose commentary
(ud@harana) is extant though not printed ; Some$vara, whose commentary
has been mentioned by Amaraja (c. A.D, 1200); Amaraja (c. A.D. 1200),


--- Page 65 ---
Izviii INTRODUCTION

whose commentary (rasanabhasya) has been edited by Babuaji Misra:
and Sridatta, a manuscript of whose commentary exists in Nepal. An
anonymous commentary (udaharana) exists in the India Office Library,
London, and another written in Nepali in the Lucknow University
Library, Lucknow. Suryadeva (b. A.D. 1191) proposed to write a
commentary on the khanda-khadyaka" but it is not known whether he
actually wrote it.

The Khanda-khadyaka reached Arab where it was translated into
Arabic under the title Zij-al-Arkand, and was widely used.? It was
retranslated into Arabic under the title Az-Zij Kandakatik al-Arabi
(=The Arabic Khanda-khadyaka) by the Persian scholar Al-Birani
(A.D. 973-1048), who has quoted some of the methods of this work
in his other works. (E. g., see Risa’ il, HT, p. 150).

From Arab, the Khanda-khadyaka reached Europe and had its
impact on astronomy there. O, Neugebauer has shown that “Kepler's
theory of parallax is identical with the theory of the Khanda-khadyaka,®

8. THE PRESENT EDITION OF THE ARYABHATIYA
(a) Sanskrit Text

The Sanskrit text incorporated in the Present work is edited
critically and all possible efforts have been made to reconstruct it as
authentically as possible. It is based on: (i) original manuscripts
of the text,. (ii) available commentaries and (iii) quotations from
later astronomers, The said three sources, it might be seen, are
complementary and mutually corrective. Thus, while the text manu-
scripts present the text as handed down by manuscript tradition, the
commentaries containing the meanings and derivations-of the words in
the text help in correcting scribal and other errors, besides indicating
textual variants. Quotations in later works, cited either by way of |

—

 

1, Vide his statement towards the end of his commentary on
Snipati’s Jataka-paddhati.

2. See E. S. Kennedy, A survey of Islamic astronomical tables,
p. 138. According to Kennedy, it “was translated into Arabic, at or
before the time of Ya’qub ibn Tariq, and was widely used”.

3. See O, Neugebauer, The astronomical tables of Al-Khwarizmi,
p. 124,


--- Page 66 ---
PRESENT EDITION lxix

approbation in establishing a point or by way of refutation by a
critic, are particularly helpful in deciding upon the correct readings of
the text.

1. Text manuscripts!

Seven palmleaf manuscripts in Malayalam script, designated A
to G (noticed below), have been collated towards fixing the text of
the Aryabhatiya.

A. Ker*. 475-A. Mal. (Malayalam script), Pl. (palmleaf), Cm.
(complete) ; 17-cm.x5cm., 7ff., 7 lines per page with about 36 letters
per line. The verses have been written continuously through the entire
length of folios on both the pages. Old, damaged and brittle to the
touch. Inked and revised. The writing is quite readable but not shapely.
The date of the ms. is given in a post-colophonic Kali chronogram in the
katapayadi notation which reads, sevyo dugdhabdhitalpah (16,99,817),
and corresponds to A.D. 1552.

The astronomical codex which contains A belonged originally to
the reputed scholarly Namputiri family of KUtalltr in South Malabar,
and carries the undermentioned works, all on mathematics and
astronomy : A. Aryabhatiya of Aryabhata; B. Maha-Bhaskariya and
C. Laghu-Bhaskartya of Bhiskara I: D. Siddhanta-dargana and E.
Tantra-sangraha of Nilakantha Somayaji ; F. Lilavati of Bhaskara II ;
G. Paiicabodha, anon. ; H. Laghumdnasa of Muiijala ; t. Candracchaya-
Sanita of Nilakantha Somayaji; and J. Goladipika and K, Grahanastaka,

both of Paramesvara (A.D. 1431),

B. Ker, 5131-B. Mal,, Pl., Cm, ; 56 cm.x5 cm., 4 ff., 8 lines per
page with about 75 letters per line. Old, damaged and brittle. Inked
and revised. Readable writing. Generally correct text, Neither
dated nor scribe mentioned. The other work contained in this codex
is Bha@gavata-Purdna numbered as 5131-A.

The codex has been procured from Shri Vasudevan Nampittiri of
the village of Marappadi in Central Kerala.

 

 

1, The material of this section was supplied by K.V. Sarma.

2. Ker. stands for the Kerala University Or. Research Inst,
and Mss, Library, Trivandrum.


--- Page 67 ---
Ixx INTRODUCTION

C. Ker. 13300. Mal., Pl, Cm., 40 om. x5 cm,; 7 ff. with 7 lines
a page and about 50 letters a line, Old, brittle and damaged, some of
the folios being torn. Neither dated, nor scribe mentioned. The text
preserved is fairly accurate.

The works contained in this astronomical codex are: A.
Aryabhatiya, B. Stirya-siddhanta, C. Laghumanasa of Muiijala, D.,
Maha-Bhaskariya of Bhaskara I, and E, Drgganita of Parameévara.

The codex was procured by Shri Karuvelil Nilakantha Pillai of
Karthikappalli (S. Kerala) from an unidentified source.

D. Ker. 13305-B. Mal., Pl., Icm., 15 om. x5 cm.; 12ff. with 8 lines
a page and about 24 letters a line. Late ms., in good preservation.
Very legible writing. Inked and revised, the reviser’s corrections being
identifiable by their not being inked. The text preserved is accurate.
The ms. is not dated; neither is any scribe mentioned.

The codex contains also the Aryabhatiya-vyakhya in Sanskrit by
Ghatigopa, which is catalogued as No. 13305-A. The codex belonged

originally to the family collection of Patififidretattu Pisaram in Kitanmur
in Central Kerala.

E, Trip. 542-A, belonging to the Govt, Sanskrit College, Tripuni-
thura, near Cochin. Mal., Pl. Cm., 20 cm.x3 cm. ; 11 ff, with 10 lines
a page and about 24 letters a line, A comparatively late manuscript,
written in shapely script. The text preserved is generally correct. No
Gate is given, nor is any scribe named.

The works contained in this astronomical codex are: A.
Aryabhatiya, B. Aryabhatiya-vyakhya in Malayalam by Ghatigopa and
C. Venvaroha by Madhava with the Malayalam gloss of Acyuta
Pisarati.

F. Ker. 501-A, Mal., Pl., Icm., 20 cm. x3 cm, ; 12 ff., with 7 letters
a page and about 25 letters a line. Old and damaged, with the corners
worn out on account of constant use. Lacks the Gitikapada, Inked and
Tevised, the corrections being uninked. The text preserved is accurate,
No date or scribe has been mentioned.

The works contained in the codex are: A. Aryabhatiya, B.
Catuslokah (nanagranthoddhrtah), and C. Muhurtapadavi. The codex
formed part of the famous mediaeval collection of the DeSamangalam


--- Page 68 ---
PRESENT EDITION Ixxi

Variyam in North. Kerala, as known from an uninked marginal
statement on the first folio, which reads: Desamangalattu Variyatte
Aryabhatadi.

G. Ker. C. 2475-B. Mal., Pl., Icm., extending up to Ganita, verse
2 only, 25cm.x5cm., 1 f., with 10 lines a page and about 37 letters
a line. Carefully written in beautiful hand. Scrupulously revised. Not
dated, nor any scribe mentioned. The text preserved is accurate.

The other work contained in the codex is the Aryabhatiya-
vyakhya by Suryadeva Yajva. The codex contains also folios with
some miscellaneous matter inscribed thereon. The codex belonged
originally to the library of the royal principality of Edappalli in
Central Kerala.

All these manuscripts are completely independent of each other.
Neither do they present any consistent common characteristic so as to
enable them being grouped in any order or formulate any stemma codi-
cum to portray their descent.

2. Text preserved in the commentaries

Of the commentaries on the Aryabhatiya, those by Bhaskara I
(A.D. 629), Stryadeva (b. A.D. 1191), Paramegvara (A.De 1431) and
Nilakantha (A.D, 1500) are available in print. These commentaries
have been referred to as Bh., Sa., Pa., and Ni., respectively, and the
following editions have been used in the collation of the text :

’ Bh, Edited by K.S. Shukla in Part If of the present series.
Su, Edited by K.V. Sarma in Part IIIf of the present series.
Pa. Edited by H. Kern at Leiden in 1874,

Ni. Edited by K. Sambagiva Sastri (7'SS, Nos. 101 and 110) in
1930, 1931 and by Suranad Kunjan Pillai (7SS, No. 185)
in 1957,

Commentaries by Someévara, Yallaya (A.D. 1480), Raghunatha-:
raja (A.D. 1597), Krsnadasa (A.D. 1756-1812) and Ghatigopa (c. A.D.
1800-60) are available in manuscript form. The following manuscripts
(designated as So., Ya, Ra., Ky., and Gh, respectively) have beed used
in the collation of the text :


--- Page 69 ---
teil INTRODUCTION

So. Transcript. Accession No. 45886 of the Lucknow Uni-
versity Library, Lucknow. (Transcribed from Bs. No, 272,
Catalogue No. 335, Accession No 2495 of the Bombay
University Library, Bombay, The original manuscript is
complete but extremely defective and full of inaccuracies
and omissions).

Ya. Transcript in the collection of A. N. Singh. It contains
Ganita-pada (up to vs, 28), Kalakriya-pada and Gola-pada,

Ra. Transcript. Accession Nos. 45771, 45772 and 45773 of the
Lucknow University Library, Lucknow. Complete in four
Padas.

Kr. Transcript in the collection of K,V. Sarma. The original
of this transcript, which contains the Gitika-pada only, is
available in the Government Sanskrit College Library,
Tripunithura, Kerala,

Gh. Transcript of the smaller version of Ghatigopa’s Malayalam
commentary in the collection of K.V. Sarma, It isa
copy from Ms. No. 542-B of the Government Sanskrit
College Library, Tripunithura. See E. above.

The variant readings noted or discussed in the commentaries have
also been generally taken into consideration.

3. Quotations from later astronomers

Extracts from the Aryabhaliya occur as quotations in the Brahma-
Sphuta-siddhanta of Brahmagupta, Prthidaka’s (A.D. 860) commentary
on the Brahma-sphufa-siddhanta, Govinda-svami’s commentary on the
Maha-Bhaskariya, and Sankaranarayana’s (A. D, 869) and Udaya-
divakara’s (A.D. 1073) commentaries on the Laghu-Bhaskariya. These
works have been referred to as Br., Pr., Go., $a. and Ud. respectively,
and the following editions or manuscripts of them have been used ‘

Sr. Edited by Sudhakara Dvivedi, Benaras, 1902.

Pr. Photostat copy of Ms. Egg. 2769: No. 1304 of the India
Office Library, London, Belonging to the Lucknow
University Library, Lucknow, Accession No, 47047.


--- Page 70 ---
PRESENT EDITION oo ixxift
Go. Edited by T.S. Kuppanna Sastri and published in Madras
Government Oriental Series, No. CXXX, 1957.
$a. Transcript in the collection of A.N. Singh, Complete.
Ud. Transcript. Accession No. 46338 of the Lucknow University
Library, Lucknow, Complete.
4. Variations in reading

The collation of the manuscripts did not reveal many significant
variations in the text. Im the first Pada, the variations are mostly
phonetic :

(i) 8, & (vs. 3) (ii) wefeea, sifoee (vs. 4)
(it) WAMU, AIM (vs. 5) (iv) AAUNAR, AITTE, mazar (vs. 9)
(v) Wt, % (vs. 10) (vi) Tat, * (vs. 10)

(vii) fara, feat (vs. 12)

Other variations in vs. 12 also seem to be inspired by phonetic require-
ments. This Pada was generally learnt by heart and the students seem to
have varied the readings to suit their pronunciations without affecting
the meaning of the text.

One significant variation in reading in this Pada is :
i for @ (vs. 6)
which seems to have been deliberately made under the pressure of
Varahamihira’s criticism of the theory of the Earth’s rotation.
Variations in Pada Il are generally verbal and due to the scribes,
The following variations, though not significant, are noteworthy :
(i) qaraiga: Sele: wo: a Ta (Prthudaka)
aaa aarad: eta: Fe: aA TT (Others)

(ii) aaa Gerla reget CaeGery | (Bhaskara and”
Some$vara) | (vs. 25)
wei Aonaled Tee HATA ETAAGAY | (Others)

| (vs. 17)

In Pada III, there is one significant variation in reading, viz. :
mraaivarta for tataatearfa (vs. 5)

This, too, seems to have been made when bhak was changed into bham,
Other noteworthy, though not very significant, variations are +

A.Bh. x


--- Page 71 ---
Izxiv INTRODUCTION
gare for qed
wasd semEd waft dq for neat ME waft ga
in vs. 22,, both of these being mentioned by Bhaskara I,
In Pada IV also, there is one significant reading-difference, viz. :
qsaqain for TAAL (vs. 14)

which is inspired by the teaching of Brahmagupta. Other notable
variations are :

wafera for wafara (vs. 8)
fargeuda wear or aeeAtHTEAt for Frageadatisat (vs. 8)
aanlzut for wanteut (vs, 13)

ad wound (Bh, So.), wraeana wae (others) (vs. 16)
waeeA: for wile: (vs. 27)

West for wfetat (vs, 35)

Bara diet for qeaardtaed (vs. 39)

feacueren act for feeraed are (vs. 42)

fearad for feafarnen (vs. 44)

eaat for wert: (vs. 49)

RAT or AA for frre (vs. 50)

5. Selection of readings

In the selection of readings for the Sanskrit text, preference
has been given to the most appropriate and, if possible, the oldest
readings. Readings which were considered to be wrong or due to
subsequent alteration in the text, or else, were less appropriate and
unacceptable have been recorded in the footnotes.

(b) English translation, notes etc.

The English translation and explanatory and critical notes
Subjoined to the Sanskrit text as well as references to parallel
passages given in the footnotes have been taken with necessary modi-

ED

 

1. It is difficult to say whether it is yavakoti or yamakoti but
most of the manuscripts give the former reading.


--- Page 72 ---
PRESENT EDITION lxzv

fications from my D. Litt. Thesis. Most of the matter in this intro-
duction is also derived from the same source. .

The question of translating technical material written in Sanskrit
into English presents considerable difficulty. It requires a thorough
knowledge of both the languages, which few can claim. Effort has been
directed towards giving, as far as possible, a literal version of the text
in English. The portions of the English translation enclosed within
brackets do not occur in the text and have been given in the translation
to make it understandable and are, at places, explanatory. Without
these portions, the translation, at these places, might appear meaningless
to a reader who cannot consult the original for lack of knowledge of
Sanskrit, Attempt has been made to keep the spirit of the original
and as far as possible the sequence of the text has been kept unaltered.
Sanskrit technical terms having no equivalents in English have been
given as such in the translation. They have been explained in the
subjoined notes and the reader can always refer to the glossary of the
technical terms given in the end to find the meaning of such terms

whenever the subjoined notes do not “contain the explanations of the
terms,

Verses dealing with the same topic have been translated together
and are prefixed by an introductory heading briefly summarizing their
contents. This is in keeping with the practice followed by the commen-
tators. For the convenience of the Sanskrit-knowing readers, the
Sanskrit text of each passage translated has been given just beford its
English translation.

The translation is followed by short notes and comments compri-
sing: (1) elucidation of the text where necessary, (2) rationale of the
rule given in the teat, (3) illustrative solved examples, where necessary,
' (4) critical notes, and (5) other relevant matter, depending on the
passage translated. In doing so, a vast literature has been consulted
and parallel passages occurring elsewhere have been noted in the foot-
notes. Practically all commentaries in Sanskrit on the Aryabhatiya,
whether published or in manuscript, have been consulted, They have
been of considerable help in translating the text ; without them quite
a number of passages would have temained obscure, Advantage has
also been taken of the interpretations and views of the earlier translators
of the Aryabhatiya, such as P.C. Sengupta and W.E. Clark.


--- Page 73 ---
lexvi INTRODUCTION ~

-. For the convenience of the reader, the chapter-name has been
mentioned at ‘the top on the left hand page and the subject matter
under discussion at the top on the right hand page. The verse-number
is also mentioned at the top.

Four appendices have been given at the end :

1. Index of half-verses and key-passages.
2. . _Index-glossary of technical terms,

3. Subject Index.

4,. Bibliography.

It is hoped that they would prove useful to the reader.

9. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

Parts I and I of the present Series were to appear .as Part One.
(containing a general introduction to the works of Bhaskara I) and Part |
Four (containing Bhaskara I’s commentary and English translation of the
Aryabhatiya) of the ‘Bhaskara I and his works’ series, of which Parts Two;
and Three were published by the Department of Mathematics and
Astronomy, Lucknow University, Lucknow. However, in spite of pressing
demand from interested readers, these could not be published so.
far, 1 am grateful to the Indian National Science Academy, New.
Delhi, for sponsoring the present publication. I am greatly indebted
to Professor F.C. Auluck, Vice-President, National Commission for”
the Compilation of the History of Sciences in India, and President,
Organizing Committee for the 1500th Birth Anniversary of Aryabhata I,
and to Dr B.V. Subbarayappa, Executive Secretary, Indian National
Science Academy, New Delhi, and Secretary, Organizing Committee
for the 1500th Birth Anniversary of Aryabhata I, who have taken keen
interest in the present work and have gladly offered ail possible help
and advice from time totime. Thanks are due also to Prof. B.P. Pal,
President, Indian National Science Academy, New Delhi, for writing
the foreword to the present series of works.

Originally, the idea was to publish only the English translation
of the Aryabhatiya along with notes and comments as was earlier done
by P.C. Sengupta and W.E, Clark. The Sanskrit text was included
at the suggestion of Shri K.V. Sarma, who took the responsibility of


--- Page 74 ---
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT : Ixxvii

preparing a critically collated text on the basis of the manuscripts of
the Aryabhatiya that existed in the Kerala University Oriental Research
Institute and Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum, and in the Library
of the Government Sanskrit College, Tripunithura, and were accessible
tohim. The four appendices occurring at the end of this volume were
also prepared by him, These have enhanced the value and usefulness
of the work. Shri Sarma also gave his wholehearted cooperation in

_the editing of the present series of books. I offer my sincere thanks
to him.

Thanks are due to the authorities of the Kerala University
Oriental Research Institute and Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum, the
Government Sanskrit College, Tripunithura, and the Lucknow
University Library, Lucknow, whose manuscripts were utilized in the
collation of the Sanskrit text, and to the many scholars whose works
were consulted during the preparation of the present work.

1 wish to express my deep sense of gratitude to my teacher, the
late Dr. A.N. Singh, and to the late Dr. Bibhutibhusan Datta, who,
in 1954, had gone through the English translation and notes and had
offered valuable suggestions for their improvement. An alternative
interpretation of vs. 1 of the Gitika-pada, as suggested by the latter, is
mentioned in his sacred memory.

1 am grateful to Dr R.P. Agarwal, Professor and Head of the
Department of Mathematics and Astronomy, Lucknow University,
Lucknow, also Hony. Librarian of the Lucknow University. Library,
Lucknow, for providing me all facilities in my work.

My cordial thanks are due to my colleague and friend Pandit
Markandeya Misra, Jyotishacharya, for his assistance in the present work.

I must also express my thanks to the workers of the V.V.R.I.
Press, Hoshiarpur, for the excellent composing, printing and get-up
of the book.

K, S. SHUKLA


--- Page 75 ---
CHAPTER I

THE GITIKA SECTION
(‘TEN APHORISMS IN THE GITIKA STANZAS’)

[ In the 10 stanzas composed in the gitika metre, comprising
the 10 aphorisms (sutra) of this chapter, Aryabhata sets out the
parameters which are necessary for calculations in astronomy.
A beginner in astronomy was supposed to learn them by heart
so that he might not feel any difficulty while making calculations
Jateron, For the convenience of the beginner, this chapter
was written as an independent tract and issued under the name
Dasagitika-sutra (‘Ten aphorisms in the gitikd stanzas’) which is
mentioned in the concluding stanza. When this Dasagitika-sttra

. is regarded as a chapter of the Aryabhafiya, it is called
Gitika-pada (Gitika Section). }

INVOCATION AND INTRODUCTION
afertaaae & atat Zaat at war
araacentt mats afiyd araficat aterg il 9 i

1. Having paid obeisance to God Brahma—who is one and many,
the real God, the Supreme Brahman - - Aryabhata sets forth the

three, viz., mathematics (ganita), reckoning of time (Kalakriya)
and celestial sphere (go/a).

Obeisance to God Brahma at the outset of the work. points
to the school to which the author Aryabhata I belongs. . -‘‘Obeisance
has been paid to Svayambhu (Brahma)’’, writes the commentator

—_—

 

1. Abbreviations : Text mss. A to G. Text in later works and
commentaries : Bh. (Bhaskara 1), Br. (Brahmagupta), Go. (Govinda-
svami), Kr. (Krsgadasa), Ni. (Nilakantha), Pa. (Paramesvara), Pr. (Prthi-
daka), Ra, (Raghunatha-raja), $a. (Sankaranarayana), So. (Someévara),
SU. (Suryadeva), Ud. (Udayadivakara), Ya. (Yallaya).

A, Bh. 1


--- Page 76 ---
2 GITIKA SECTION { Gitike Sn.-

Suryadeva (b. A.D, 1191), “because the science which is being set out
was due to Him and the mysteries of that science were revealed to
Aryabhata on worshipping Him.”

Brahma is spoken of as one and many, because, as writes the
commentator Bhaskara I (A.D. 629), when viewed as the unchangeable
(nirvikadra) and unstained (nirafijana) God, He is one, but when taken
to reside in the bodies of so many living beings, He is many ; or, in
the beginning He was only one, but later He became twofold—man
and woman—and created all living beings and became many ; or,
viewed as the omnipresent God (visvarnpa), He is unquestionably one
and many. He is called the ‘real god’ (satya devata), because the other
gods having been created by Him are not real gods. He is called the
‘Supreme Brahman’ ( param brahma), because He is the root cause
of the world.

Bhaskara I thinks that the first half of the Stanza may be inter-
‘preted also as obeisance to the two Brahmans —the Sabda-Brahman
(satya devata) and the Para-Brahman ; or else, as obeisance to the
triad, Hiranyagarbha (the Supreme Body), consisting of the subtle
bodies of all living beings taken collectively), the Causative Power of the
Supreme Body (satya devata), and the Master of that Power (Para-
Brahma, the Supreme Brahman). For details, the reader is referred to
Bhaskara I’s commentary on the above stanza (in Vol. II).

According to Bibhutibhushan Datta, kam in the text may be
interpreted as dnandakam (meaning ‘supreme bliss’), satydm as sat-
Svaripam (meaning ‘really existent truth’), and devatam as cif-svarapam
meaning ‘pure intelligence’), The text should, then, be translated as :

“Having paid obeisance to the Supreme Brahma - who is one
and also many, who is supreme bliss, really existent truth, and
pure intelligence—Aryabhata sets forth the three, viz., mathematics
(ganita), reckoning of time (kalakriya), and celestial sphere (gola).”


--- Page 77 ---
Verse 2. ] WRITING OF NUMBERS 3

METHOD OF WRITING NUMBERS
amigaty adsatisantaeria aq Sat a |
aixath wu aa asa aateaayt ati 2 ll

2. The varga letters (k to m) (should be written) in the varga places
and the avarga letters (y to h) in the avarga places. (The varga
letters take the numerical values 1, 2,3, etc.) from k onwards ;
(the numerical value of the initial avarga letter) y is equal to
n plus m (i.e.,5+25). In the places of the two nines of zeros
(which are written to denote the notational places), the nine
vowels should be written (one vowel in each pair of the varga
and avarga places). In the varga (and avarga) places beyond
(the places denoted by) the nine vowels too (assumed vowels or
other symbols should be written, if necessary).

In the Sanskrit alphabet the letters k to m have been classified
into five vargas (classes)— ka-varga, ca-varga, ta-varga, ta-varga and
pa-varga, ‘These letters are therefore referred to above as varga letters,
These are supposed to bear the numerical values 1 to 25 as shown in
the following table :*

Table 1. Varga letters and their numerical values

 

 

Varga Letters and their numerical values
ka-varga k= 1, kh= 2, g= 3, gh= 4, a=—5, a
ca-varga c= 6 ch= 7, j= 8, jh=9, A=10, -
fa-varga t=1l, th=12,° d=13, dh=14, n=15,
" fa-varga t=16,  th==17, d=18, dh=19, n=20,
pa-varga p=21, ph=22, b=23, bh=24, m=25,

 

The letters y to A are called avarga letters, because they are not
classified into vargas (classes Or groups). These letters bear the
following numerical values :

y=30, r=40, 1=50,. v=60, $=70, s=80, s=90, h=100,

1. The word kd in the text is meant to show that in this system
the varga letters take the numerical values 1, 2, 3, ... beginning with &
and not with &, 1, p and y as in the case of the kafapayadi system and
that # and ” are not zero in this system.


--- Page 78 ---
4 ' GITIKA SECTION { Gitiks Sa,

The values, of the said avarga letters are taken to increase by 10
because the avarga letters are written in the avarga places, and increase
by 1 in the avarga place means increase by 10 in the varga place.

On the analogy of the varga and avarga classification of the
letters, the notational places are also divided into the varga and avarga
places. The odd places denoting the units’ place, the hundreds’
place, the ten thousands’ place and so on, are called the varga places
(because 1, 100, 10000, etc. are perfect squares) ; and the even places
denoting the tens’ place, the thousands’ place, and so on are called the
avarga places (because 10, 1000, etc., are non-square numbers).

The text says that the varga letters should be written down in the
varga places and the avarga letters in the avarga places. But how ?
This is explained below :

The notational places are written first, The usual practice in India
is to denote them by ciphers :

000000000000000000

Instead, it is suggested that ‘they should be denoted by the nine vowels!
(a, i, u, r, |, e, o, ai, au) in the following manner :

au au aiaiooeeljrruuiiaa

When a letter is joined with a vowel (for example, in gr the
letter g is joined with the vowel r), the letter denotes a number and the
vowel the place where that number is to be written down. Thus gr
stands for the number g (=3) written in the varga place occupied by
the vowel r in the varga place as below : (A=Avarga, V==Varga)

A VAVAVAY
ror uowiiéeiaea

g 0 0 0 0 0 0

= 3 0 00 0 0 0

Thus gr=3000000. g has been written in the varga place because g
is a varga letter. ,

1. It is immaterial whether the short vowels a, i, u, etc. are
used or the long vowels a, i, 2, ete. Thus, ina number-chronogram, a
letter joined with a short vowel means the same thing as the same letter
joined with the same long vowel, Thus ka=ké=1, kiz=ki=100,
and so on.


--- Page 79 ---
Verse 2 j WRITING OF NUMBERS 5

Similarly, Aisibunlskhp (=A+i, $44, b+u, n+l, stkht+y
denotes the number which is obtained by writing f in the varga place and
$ in the avarga place occupied by the vowel i; 5 in the varga place
occupied by the vowel u; 2 in the evarga place occupied by the vowel |;
and s in the avarga place and kA in the varga place occupied by the
vowel r as follows :

}irruuiiaa
n sikh 0 b 5S a 0 O
=158223750 0

Thus nisibunlskhp = 1582237500.

The rule stated in the above stanza is meant essentially to provide
a key to decipher the numerical values borne by the letter chronograms
used by the author in the succeeding stanzas. The commentator Surya-
deva (b. A.D. 1191), therefore, interprets the above stanza as follows :

“The varga letters denoting numbers which occur in the
Giti-sutras that follow should be written in the odd places, and
the avarga letters should be written in the even places ... ”

The instruction ‘imau yah’ serves two purposes. Firstly, it gives
the value of the letter y as equal to # plus m (=5-+25=30) ; secondly,
it suggests that the conjoint letter #m means #-+m.

The statement of ‘“‘two nines of zeros” in the text refers to the
Indian method of writing the notational places by means of zeros,
In the present primary schools in India when a student is taught to
write large numbers he is first made to write the notational places by
means of zeros arranged horizontally as follows :

0000000 0 0

The teacher then points to the first zero on the right and says “units
place”, then to the next zero and says “‘tens’ place” then to the next
zero and says ‘hundreds’ place”, and so on, This practice of writing
the notational places is of immemorial antiquity in India, It has
been mentioned by the commentator Bhaskara I (A.D. 629), who says :

“Writing down the places, we have 000000000 0.”


--- Page 80 ---
6 - GITIKA SECTION { Gitika Sa,

REVOLUTION-NUMBERS AND ZERO POINT

amfiana: was, aft

safiagaga, 3 SRgaqey’ 1% |
uf gira, qe fa

3H, Sa UgheaTY, BTTTANT | Ul

- 25
warq ‘afted, ga
Safiya, ag aafias, Nave: |
aleaa — grafaear,
TUEITAGIMTT «ARTY lv Il
3.4. Ina yuga, the eastward revolutions of the Sun are 43,20,000 ;
of the Moon, 5,77,53,336 ; of the Earth,* 1,58,22,37,500 ; of
Saturn, 1,46,564 ; of Jupiter, 3,64,224 ; of Mars, 22,96,824 ;
of Mercury and Venus, the same as those of the Sun 3 of the
Moon’s apogee, 4,88,219; of (the sighrocca of) Mercury,
1,79,37,020 ; of (the Sighrocca of Venus, 70,22,388 ; of (the
Sighroccas of) the other planets, the same as those of the
Sun; of the moon’s ascending node in the opposite direction
(.e., westward), 2,32,226.4 These revolutions commenced at

the beginning of the sign Aries on Wednesday at sunrise
at Lanka (when it was the commencement of the current yuga).

The ‘Moon’s apogee’ is that point of the Moon’s orbit which is at
the remotest distance from the Earth, and the ‘Moon’s ascending node’

is that point of the ecliptic where the Moon crosses it in its
northward motion,

The Sghroccas of Mercury and Venus are the imaginary bodies
which are supposed to revolve around the Earth with the heliocentric
mean angular velocities of Mercury and Venus, respectively, their
directions from the Earth being always the same as those of the mean

 

 

1. Go. @.
2, C.D. Ke. Pa. Su. fsa; Bh. Ni. Pa, (alt.), Ra. So, sffeaw.
3. These are the rotations of the Earth, eastward.

4. These very revolutions, excepting those of the Earth, are stated
in MBh, vii. 1-5; LBh, i. 9-14; and $iDVr, Grahaganita, i. 3-6,


--- Page 81 ---
Vetses 4 1 REVOLUTIONS AND ZERO POINT 7

positions of Mercury and Venus from the Sun. It will thus mean that
the revolutions of Mars, the Sighrocca of Mercury, Jupiter, the Sighrocca
of Venus, and Saturn, given above, are equal to the revolutions of Mars,
Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn, respectively, round the Sun,

The following table gives the revolutions of the Sun, the Moon
and the planets along with their periods of one sidereal revolution.
The sidereal periods according to the Greek astronomer Ptolemy
(A.D. c. 100-c. 178) and the modern astronomers are also given for the
sake of comparison.

Table 2. Mean motion of the planets

 

 

Revolutions Sidereal period in
Planet in terms of days -
43,20,000
years Aryabhata I Ptolemy! Moderns?
Sun | 43,20,000 365-25868 365-24666 365-25636
Moon 5,77 53,336 27-32167 27-32167 27-32166

Moon’s apogee 488,219 3231.98708 3231-61655 3232-37543
Moon’s asc. node 2,32,226 6794-74951 6796-45587 6793-39108

Mars 22,96,824 686:99974 686-94462 6869797
Sighrocca of
Mercury 1,79,37,020 87-96988 8796935 87-9693
Jupiter 3,64,224 4332-27217 4330-96064 4332-5887
Sighrocca of
Venus 70,22,388: 22469814 224-69890 224-7008.
Saturn 1,46,564 10766-06465 10749-94640  10759-201

eee A TS

The epoch of the planetary motion mentioned in the text
marks the beginning of the current yuga and not the beginning

 

 

1. Taken. from Bina Chatterjee, “The Khanda-khadyaka of
Brahmagupta’”, World Press, Calcutta, 1970, vol. 1, Appendix VIL,
p. 281.

2. Taken from HN. Russell, Dugan and J.Q. Stewart, Astrono-
my, Part 1: The Solar system, Revised edition, Ginn and Company,
Boston, Appendix. Also, see ibid., pp. 150, 159. The sidereal periods
of Moon’s apogee and ascending node are taken from P.C. Sengupta
and N.C, Lahiri’s introduction (p. xiv) to Babuaji Mi$ra’s edition of
Sripati’s Siddhanta-sekhara.


--- Page 82 ---
8 GITIKA. SECTION Ct Gitika Sn.

of the current -Kalpa as was Supposed by P.C. Sengupta.
Kalpa, according to Aryabhata I, started on Thursday 1,98,28,80,000
years or 7,24,26,41,32,500 days before the beginning of the current
yuga ; and 1,98,61,20,000 years or 7,25,44,75,70,625 days before the
beginning of the current Kaliyuga.*’ The current Kaliyuga began
on Friday, February 18, 3102 B.C., at sunrise at Lanta (a hypothetical
place on the equator where the meridian of Ujjain intersects it), which

Synchronized with the beginning of the light half of the lunar (synodic)
month of Caitra.

The cufrent

One thing that deserves Special notice is the statement of the
Earth’s rotations. Aryabhata I is, perhaps, the earliest astronomer in
India who advanced the theory of the Earth’s rotation and gave the
number of rotations that the Farth performs in a Period of 43,20,000
years. The period of one sidereal totation of the Earth according
of Aryabhata I is 23% 56" 4°! The Corresponding modern value is
23" 56™ 4091.2 The accuracy of Aryabhata I's value is remarkable.

Of the other Indian astronomers who upheld the theory of the
Earth’s rotation, mention may be made of Prthtdaka (A.D. 860) and
Makkibhatta (A.D. 1377). In the Skanda-purana (1. 1.31, 71), too, the
Earth is described as revolving like a bhramarika (spinning top, potter’s
wheel or whirlpoo)), ,

The commentators of the Aryabhatt ya, who hold the opinion
that the Earth is stationary, think that Aryabhata

I states the rotations of
the Earth because the asterisms,

which revolve westward around the earth
by the force of the provector wind, see that the Earth rotates eastward.

These commentators were indeed helpless because Aryabhata I’s
theory of the Earth’s rotation received a severe blow at the hands
-Of Varahamihira (d. A.D. 587) and Brahmagupta (A.D. 628) whose

arguments against this theory could not be refuted by any Indian
astronomer,

It is noteworthy that the Greek astronomer Ptolemy,
Aristotle (B.C. 384-322), believed that the Earth was statio
adduced arguments in support of his view.

following
mary and

 

 

1, Vide infra notes on verse 5.

2. See W.M. Smart » Zext-Book on Spherical Astronomy,
Cambridge, 1940, p. 420,


--- Page 83 ---
Verse 5 Jj KALPA, MANU AND BEGINNING OF KALI 9
KALPA, MANU AND BEGINNING OF KALI
Hel HAN Z, AGI
Tt WI, Ta 4, ATT Fat 7 |
BFUTITTUAT
a4, qerares, aA aT NY I

5. A day of Brahma (or a Kalpa) is equal to (a period of) 14 Manus,
and (the period of one) Manu is equal to 72 yugas. Since
Thursday, the beginning of the current Kalpa, 6 Manus, 27 yugas
and 3 quarter yugas had elapsed before the beginning of the
current Kaliyuga (lit. before Bharata).

Thus we have
1 Kalpa=14 Manus
and 1 Manu=72 yugas,
so that 1 Kalpa==1008 yugas or 4,35,45,60,000 years. .
Likewise, the time elapsed since the beginning of the current
Kalpa up to the beginning of the current Kaliyuga
26 Manus-+-272 yugas
#2 (6 X 72-++ 273) yugas
=%(432-+ 273) x 4320000 years
221986120000 years or 725447570625 days.

It is interesting to note that Aryabhata I prefers to say ‘before
Bharata” (bharatat purvam) instead of saying “before the beginning of
Kaliyuga” which is the sense actually intended here. ,

Regarding the interpretation of -bhdratat purvam there is
difference of opinion amongst the commentators. The commentator
Some$vara interprets it as meaning ‘before the occurrence of the Bharata
(battle)’. P. C. Sengupta (A.D. 1927) and W.E, Clark (A.D. 1930), too,

 

 

—

1. Bh. Sa, WAYAT: ; all others AAA,
2. E. Bh. Sa. at: ; all others 47.
A Bh, 2


--- Page 84 ---
10 _ GITIKA SECTION { Gitika Sn.

have interpreted the ward bharata as meaning ‘the Bharata battle’. -In
the Mahabharata we are told that the Bharata battle occurred at the end
of the Drapara yuga and before the beginning of the Kali yuga:
“The battle between the armies of the Kurus and the Pandavas
occurred at Syamantapajicaka (Kuruksetra) when it was the
junction of Kali and Dvapara,”*!
So this interpretation of bhdratat purvam (‘before Bharata’) is
equivalent to kaliyugat purvam (‘before Kaliyuga’), as it ought to be,

The commentators Bhaskara I (A.D. 629), Siiryadeva (b. A.D. 1191)
and others have interpreted bhdratat purvam as meaning ‘before
Yudhisthira’, i.e., “before the time when Yudhisthira of the Bharata
dynasty relinquished kingship and proceeded on the last journey
(maha-prasthana)’.” According to these commentators, this event

—

1. Mahabharata, Adiparva, ch. 2, vs, 13.

2. According to the Bhagavata-Purana (Skandha 1, ch. 15,
vs. 36), Kaliyuga began on the day on which Lord Krsna left this earthly
abode : :

war ageal Naat wet gel caaear qaclhaqenq: |
aagrastaqgaaaaadeg: afreaada i

And when Yudhisthira came.to know that Kaliyuga had commenced,

he made up his mind to proceed on the last journey (Skandha 1,
ch. 15, vs. 37):

afatsorencafata qe: gts usd | aR aarssenfr
fanrey atamafsaigataadag anata qaqa

Other views are that Kaliyuga commenced the moment Lord Krsna
left for heaven :
afena gon} fet arreafeneta aaa 1
staged sfagainfs sg: vufae: 0
Bhagavata-Purana, Skandha 12, ch. 2, vs, 33
Or, when the Seven Rsis (ie., the seven stars of the constellation of
Ursa Major) entered the asterism Magha :
war Rada: art wary faazfia fz 1
aat Tqaeg Sfaaiaarsecaaay:
Bhagavata-Purdna, Skandha 12, ch, 2, ys, 31


--- Page 85 ---
Verse 5 ] KALPA, MANU AND BEGINNING OF KALI. 11

took place on Thursday, the last day of the past Dvdapara. But the
basis of this assumption is not specified. The commentators simply
say : “This is what is well known.” (it/ prasiddhih) 3 ‘

According to these commentators, too, bharatat purvam ultimately
means ‘before the beginning of the current Kaliyuga’.

Brahmagupta criticises Aryabhata I for his teaching in the above
stanza. Writes he :

“Since the measures of a Manu, a (quarter) yyga and a Kalpa
and the periods of time elapsed since the beginnings of
Kalpa and Krtayuga (as taught by Aryabhata) are not in ©
conformity with those taught in. the Smrtis, it follows that
Aryabhata is not aware of the mean motions (of the planets),

“Since Aryabhata states that three quarter yugas had elapsed
at the beginning of Kaliyuga, the beginning of the current
yuga and the end of the past yuga (according to him) occurred
in the midst of Krtayuga; so his yuga is not the true one.”*

“Since the initial day on which the Kalpa started according
to (Aryabhata’s) sunrise system of astronomy is Thursday and
not Sunday (as it ought to be), the very basis has become
discordant,”**

——_——"

 

1. It is, however, noteworthy that Indian astronomers of all
schools are perfectly unanimous in taking Friday as the day on which the
current Kaliyuga commenced.

2. Tar Ayraet: serfand Hatkaadt 7
eqearaaara ara sri weaTfey
BrSpSt, xi. 10
3. wraral qaoratetty arate afraid aq
aay HATRTATAT AT TTM FT AT TEATT
BrSpSi, xi. 4
4. Hare feaaret qedefariser wat wearet
aq waeaal weAarEr fread 1
BrSpSi, xi. 11


--- Page 86 ---
12

In
says :

GITIKA SECTION ‘[ Gitika Sn,

reply to this criticism, astronomer VateSvara (A. D. 904)

“If the yuca stated by Brahmagupta conforms to the teachings

of the Smrtis, how is it that the Moon (according to him)

is not beyord the Sun fas stated’ in the Smrtis). If that

is unacceptable because ‘that statement of the Smrtis is

is false.

false, then, alas, the yuga-hypothesis of the Sutis, too,
aol ,

“Since a planet does not make complete revolutions during
the quarter yugas acceptable to Brahmagupta, son of Jisnu,
(whereas it does during the quarter yugas according to
Aryabhata), it follows that the quarter yugas of Srimad
Aryabhata (and not those of Brahmagupta) are the correct
ones,””*

“If a Kalpa should begin with a Sunday, how is it that
Brahmagupta’s Kalpa. does not end with a Saturday.
Brahmagupta’s Kalpa being thus contradictory to his own state-
ment, it is a fabrication of his own mind (and is by no means
authoritative).’*

ee

1,

eaniner ante Bape ay weeafe eitadtfafa:
aeeqaraafadtg teat ga! asf anaecar gary
VaSi, Grahaganita, ch. 1, sec. 10, vs. 3

frorgaefeddnfeata: Saat afg aa: cavdea
WSoat TARA Qs era: styaiacaiira: PHT:

VaSi, Grahaganita, ch. 1, sec, 10, vs. 2

eT gas: Hea vTeahe: He 7 waa 1
Praremeraeagioned: ga: FET:

VaSi, Grahaganita, ch, I, sec. 10, vs. 10


--- Page 87 ---
Verse 6 ] ORBITS. AND EARTH’S ROTATION 13
PLANETARY ORBITS, EARTH’S ROTATION
TITAS TH
 sqeertearh 34-35-79: |
made eat a,
warty wendy, wataisa: ll ¢ I

6. Reduce the Moon’s revolutions (in a yuga) to signs, multiplying
_ them by 12 (lit. using the fact that there are 12 signs in a circle
or revolution). Those signs mutiplied successively by 30, 60 and
_ 10 yield degrees, minutes and yojanas, respectively. (These
yojanas give the length of the circumference of the sky). The
Earth rotates through (an angle of) one minute of arc in one
respiration (=4 sidereal seconds). The circumference of the
sky divided by the revolutions of a planet in a yuga gives (the
length of) the orbit on which the planet moves.? The orbit of

the asterisms divided by 60 gives the orbit of the Sun.*

Thus we have

&
Orbit of the sky =57753336 x 12x 30x60 10 yojanas
= 12474720576000 yojanas :
Orbit of the asterisms—= 173260008 yojanas

Orbit of the Sun =2887666% yojanas
Orbit of the Moon216000 yojanas

 

 

 

. 132027
t of = 54 j
Orbit of Mars=5: 31291) 37103 yojanas
Orbit of (Sighrocea of ) Mercury = 6954732322! yojanas
896851
: : 699
t =34 ——— yofe
Orbit of Jupiter 34250133 1897 yojanas .
: 7 _ 255221
Orbit of (Sighroeca of) Venus—=1776421 595199 yojanas
Orbit of Saturn =85114493 icon yojanas.

 

1. Br, Pr. Ud. yf: ; all others ¥.

2. Cf. Some’vara : vena aeafefa: aenetrert: |

3. The same rule, excepting the rate of the Earth’s motion,
occurs in M/Bh, vii. 20, also,


--- Page 88 ---
14 GITIKA SECTION ’ [ Gitika Se,

These orbits are hypothetical and ate based on the following two
assumptions : ,

1. That all the planets have equal linear motion in their res-
.pective orbits.

2. That one minute of arc (1) of the Moon’s orbit is equal to
10 yojanas in length,”

From the second assumption, the length of the Moon’s orbit
comes out to be 216000 yojanas. Multiplying this by the Moon’s
revolution-number (viz. 57753336), we get 12474720576000 yojanas.
This is the distance described by the Moon in a yuga. From the first
assumption, this is also the distanca described by any other planet in
a yuga. Hence ,

Orbit of a planet = %istance described by a planet in a yuga

revolution-number of that planet
This is how the lengths of the orbits of the various planets stated above
have been obtained.

In the case of the asterisms, it is assumed that. their orbit is 60
times the orbit of the Sun. By saying that “the orbit of the asterisms
divided by 60 gives the orbit of the Sun”, Aryabhata I really means to
say that “the orbit of the asterisms is 60 times the orbit of the Sun.”

Indian astronomers, particularly the followers of Aryabhata I,
believe that the distance described by a planet in a yuga denotes the
circumference of the space, supposed to be spherical, which is illumined
by the Sun’s rays, This space, they call ‘the sky’ and ‘its circumference
‘the orbit of the sky’. Bhaskara I says :

“(The outer boundary of) that much of the sky as the Sun’s rays
illumine on all sides is called the clrcumference or orbit of the
sky. Otherwise, the sky is beyond limit; it is impossible to
state its measure.’

“For us the sky extends to as far as it is illumined by the rays
of the Sun. Beyond that, the sky is immeasurable.’

 

 

1. See A, iii, 12.

2. This is implied in the text under discussion.

3. See Bhaskara I’s commentary on A, i. 6, in Vol. IL
4. See Bhaskara I’s commentary on A, iii. 12, in Vol. II.


--- Page 89 ---
Verse7 1 LINEAR DIAMETERS 15

According to the Indian astronomers, therefore,
___ Orbit of the sky
Planet’s revolution-number

 

Orbit of a planet =

The statement of the Earth’s rotation through 1’ in one
respiration,' stated in the text, has been criticised by Brahmagupta,
who says :

“If the Earth moves (revolves) through one minute of arc in one
respiration, from where does it start its motion and where
does itgo ? And, if it rotates (at the same place), why do tall
lofty objects not fall down 2

The reading bham (in place of bhuh) adopted by the commentators
is evidently incorrect. The correct reading is bhak, which has been
mentioned by Brahmagupta (A.D. 628), Prthudaka (A. D. 860) and
Udayadivakara (A.D. 1073).*

LINEAR DIAMELERS
TH Asa, fay
sata, SHeaitaar fry, # AV: |
BT-Ye-Ts-Th-aa: |
UEN-S--U-aA-AITEL, AAHAAT: | 8 II

7. 8000 nr make a yojana. The diameter of the Earth is 1050
yojanas; of the Sun and the Moon, 4410 and 315 yojanas,
(respectively) ;* of Meru, 1 yojana ; of Venus, Jupiter, Mercury,

. Saturn and Mars (at the Moon’s mean distance), one-fifth,
one-tenth, one-fifteenth, one-twentieth, and one-twentyfifth,
' (respectively), of the Moon’s diameter.’ The years (used in this
work) are solar years.

—,

 

1. 1 respiration==4 seconds of time.
2. sctifa wat wife afe got ase HreaTAT A
madarqeateaed qafa eases: FeATT
BrSpSi, xi. 17.
See his commentary on LBA, i, 32-33.
4. The same values are given in MBh, v. 4; LBh, iv. 4
Cf. MBh, vi. 56.


--- Page 90 ---
16 GITIKA SECTION { Gitika Sn.

Nr is a unit of length whose measure is equal to the height of
aman. Wr is also known as nara, purusa, dhanu and danda, “Puruga,
dhanu, danda and nara are synonyms”, says Bhaskara I.

The diameters of the Earth, the Sun, the Moon, and the Planets.
stated above may be exhibited in the tabular form as follows :

Table 3. Linear diameters of the Earth ete.

Linear diameter Linear diameter in yojanas
in yojanas (at the Moon’s mean distance) -

Earth 1050

Sun 4410

Moon 315

Mars 12.60
Mercury 21.00
Jupiter 31.50
Venus 63.00
Saturn 15,75

rrr nti nears pcan

The following is a comparative table of the mean angular dia. —
meters of the planets :

Table 4. Mean angular diameters of the Planets

-

 

Planet Mean angular diameter according to
Aryabhata I Greek astronomers! Modern

 

Moon 31’ 30” 35’ 20” (Ptolemy) 31’ 8”
Tycho Brahe .
(1546-1631)

Mars 1’ 15°°6 1’ 40°
Mercury 2’ 6” 2’ 10” .
Jupiter 3 9" 2! 45"
Venus 6’ 18” 3’ 15°
Saturn 1’ 3475 1’ 50°

 

1. See E, Burgess, Zranslation of the Stirya-siddhanta, Reprint,
Calcutta, 1935, p. 196 ; and introduction by P.C. Sengupta, p. xlvi,


--- Page 91 ---
Verse 8 j OBLIQUITY AND ORBITAL INCLINATIONS 17

P. C. Sengupta translates the second half of the stanza as
follows :

“The diameters of Venus, Jupiter, Mercury, Saturn and Mars
are, respectively, 1/5, 1/10, 1/15, 1/20 and 1/25 of the diameter
of the Moon, when taken at the mean distance of the Sun.”

This is incorrect, because :

1, ‘When taken at the mean distance of the Sun” is not the
correct translation of sam@rkasamah. The correct translation
is : “The years are solar years’ as interpreted by Bhaskara Ij
and Somesvara; or “The years of a yuga are equal to the
number of revolutions of the Sun in a yuga’™ as translated

by Clark and as interpreted by Stryadeva, Parame$vara and
Raghunatha-raja.

2. The diameters of the planets stated in the stanza under
consideration correspond to the mean distance of the Moon and
not to the mean distance of the Sun as Sengupta has supposed,
Sengupta’s disagreement on this point from the commentator
Paramesvara is unwarranted. All commentators agree with
Paramesvara.

OBLIQUILTY OF ECLIPTIC AND INCLINATIONS OF ORBITS
ara gaia,
TNAGIsmVTE wT |
aft-ge-3a B-F-714,
BITTY, TTSqa weet ar ict

8. The greatest declination of the Sun is 24° The greatest
celestial latitude (lit. deviation from the ecliptic) of the Moon
is 4}°;5 of Saturn, Jupiter and Mars, 2°, 1° and 13° respectively;

—_——_—.

1. @areaa:, Tat ae qracafer aaa alata: |

2. The same value is given in MBh, iii, 6; LBA, ii. 16; KK,
Part 1, iii. 7; KR, i. 50.

3. The same value occurs in MBh, v. 30; LBh, iv.8; KK,
Part 1, iv. 1 (e-d) ; KR, ii. 3 (a-b).

A. Bh. 3


--- Page 92 ---
18 ’ GITIKA SECTION { Gitika Sn.

and of Mercury and Venus (each), 2°." 96 angulas or 4 cubits |

make a nr.

The greatest declination of the Sun is the obliquity of the —
ecliptic. According to Aryabhata I and other Indian astronomers,
its value is 24°.2. According to the modern astronomers its value is
23° 27' 8” .26—46".84 T, where T is measured in Julian centuries from
1900 A.D. The value in common use is 234°.

The greatest celestial latitude of a planet is the inclination of the
planet’s orbit to the ecliptic. The values of the inclinations of the
orbits of the Moon and the planets as given in the above stanza and those
given by the Greek astronomer Ptolemy and the modern astronomers
are being exhibited in the following table :

Table 5. Inclinations of the Orbits

rrr ne PA SSA SS

Inclination of the orbit ;
PauSi* and RoSi®

 

 

- Planet AryabhataI = Ptolemy? of Modern‘®
Varahamihira

Moon 4° 30’ 5° 4° 40’ 5° 9!

Mars 1° 30’ 1° 1° 51’ OL”
Mercury 2° 7° 7° 00’ 12”
Jupiter 1° 1° 30’ 1° 18’ 28”
Venus 2 3°30" 3° 23’ 38”
Saturn 2 2° 30 2° 29’ 20"

 

—_——

 

1, The same values occur in MBh, vii.9; LBh, vii, 7 (a-b) ;
KK, Part 1, viii. 1 (c-d); KR, vii. 8 (c-d).

2. According to the Greek astronomer Ptolemy, the obliquity of
the ecliptic is 23° 51’ 20”. See Great Books of the Western World,
vol. 16: The Almagest of Ptolemy, translated by R. Catesby Taliaferro,
Book II, p. 31.

3. See E. Burgess, Translation of the Sarya-siddhanta, Reprint,
Calcutta, 1935, p. 52. In the Almagest of Ptolemy, translated -
R. Catesby Taliaferro, the obliquities of the epicycles of Mercury and
Venus are stated as 6° 15’ and 2° 30’ respectively. See pp. 435 and 433.

4, See PSi, iii. 31.

5. See PSi, viii. 11.

6. See H.N. Russell, R.S. Dugan and J.Q. Stewart, Astronomy,
Part I, The Solar system, Revised edition, Ginn and Company, Boston,
Appendix,


--- Page 93 ---
Verse9 }.- NODES AND APOGEES 19

In the case of Mercury and Venus, Aryabhata I’s values differ
significantly from those of Ptolemy and modern astronomers because the
values given by Aryabhata I are geocentric and those given by Ptolemy
and modern astronomers are heliocentric.

Combining the instruction in the last quarter of the above verse
with that in the first quarter of verse 7, we have

24 angulas=1 cubit (hasta)
4 cubits=1 ar
8000 nr=1 yojana.

Since earth’s (equatorial) diameter = 1050 yojanas (vs. 7), according
to Aryabhata I, and ==12757 km or 7927 miles, according to modern
astronomy, it follows that Aryabhata I’s yojana is approximately equal to
121 km or 7} miles. Likewise his mr-=152 cm. or 5 ft approx, and
cubit= 14 ft. approx. The length of a cubit in common use is 14 ft.

ASCENDING NODES AND APOGEES (APHELIA)
TITT-SITE TA F-7-
THE! TANK TATA |
affatdist a aat
2
gtafe-arear-e7 fasa aealeay ls Il
9, The ascending nodes of Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and
Saturn having moved to 20°, 60°, 40°, 80° and 100° respectively
(from the beginning of the sign Aries) (occupy those positions);*
and the apogees of the Suu and the same planets (viz., Mercury,
Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn) having moved to 78°, 210°,

90°, 118°, 180° and 236° respectively (from the beginning of the
sign Aries) (occupy those positions).‘

The following table gives the longitudes of the ascending nodes and
the apogees of the planets for A. D. 499 as given by Aryabhata [ and as
calculated by modern methods. The corresponding longitudes for
A.D, 150, as stated by Ptolemy are also given for comparison.

 

 

1, A-G, SU. FaTaET 5 Bh, wazgg ; Pr. TATITR

2. Kr. #4.

3. The same values occur in MBA, vii.10; LBA, vii. 6 (c-d) ;
KK, Part 1, viii. 1; KR, vii. 8 (a-5).

4. The same values occur in MBA, vii, 11-12 (a-b) ; LBA, i. 22
(a-b), 18; KR, i. 10 (c-d) ; vii. 9 (c-d),


--- Page 94 ---
20 GITIKA SECTION { Gitiks Sa.

Table 6. Longitudes of the Ascending Nodes for A.D. 499
i

Longitudes of the ascending nodes

 

Oe eee lB
Planet AtyabhataI Ptolemy By modern
(for A.D. 150) calculation?
Mars 40° 25° 30’ 37° 49’
Mercury 20° 10° 00’ 30° 35’
Jupiter 80° 51° 00’ 85° 13’
Venus 60° 55° 00’ 63° 16’
Saturn 100° 183° 00’ 100° 32’

TSS ts Sf ESPEN

Table 7. Longitudes of the Apogees for A.D. 499

eee
Longitudes of the apogees (aphelia)

 

 

Planet Aryabhata I Ptolemy® RoSi* By modern
(for A.D. 150) of calculation®
Varahmihira
Sun 78° 65° 30’. 75° 77° 15’
Mars 118° 115° 30’ 128° 28"
Mercury 210° 190° 00’ 234° 11°
Jupiter 180° . 161° 00’ 170° 22’
Venus 90° 55° 00’ 290° 4’
Saturn 236° 233° 00’ 243° 40’

en

The word gatva (meaning ‘having moved’ or ‘having moved to’)
is used in the text to show that the ascending nodes and the apogees

 

 

 

1. See E. Burgess, ibid. Appendix, p. 331. According to
P.C. Sengupta and N.C. Lahiri, the longitudes of the ascending nodes of
Mars, Jupiter and Saturn as given by Ptolemy are 30°, 70° and 90°,
respectively. See their introduction (p. xiv) to the Siddhanta-Sekhara of
Sripati, Part Il, edited by Babuaji Misra, Calcutta, 1947.

2. See E. Burgess, ibid., Introduction by P.C. Sengupta, p. xlviii.

3. See E. Burgess, ibid., Appendix, p. 331; and Bina Chatterjee,
The Khandakhadyaka of Brahmagupta, with the commentary of
Bhattotpaia, vol. I, p. 283,


--- Page 95 ---
Verse 9] NODES AND APOGEES 21

of the planets are not stationary but have a motion. The commentator
Bhaskara I says that by teaching their motion, Aryabhata I has specified
by implication their revolution-numbers in a yuga. The aged, who
preserve the tradition, says he, remember those revolution-numbers by
the continuity of tradition. The period of 35750224800 years, according
to the tradition, is the common period of motion (yuga) of the
ascending nodes of all the planets, in which the ascending nodes of
Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn make 2,1, 4,3 and 5
revolutions, respectively. .

In the case of the apogees of the planets, the periods and the
corresponding revolutions, as handed down to Bhaskara I by tradition,
are shown in the following table :

Table 8. Periods and Revolution-numbers of the Apogees

 

 

Apogee of Period in years Revolution-number
Sun 119167416000 13
Mars 357502248000 39
Mercury 23833483200 7
Jupiter 3972247200
Venus 7944494400 1
Saturn 178751124000 59

A LS

The commentators SUryadeva and Raghunadtha-raja have also
cited the above-mentioned periods and revolution-numbers to preserve

 

 

(Footnotes of the last Page :)

According to P.C. Sengupta, the longitudes of the apogees of.
Sun, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn as given by Ptolemy are
65° 30’, 106° 40’, 181° 10’, 152° 9’, 46° 10’ and 224° 10’, respectively. See
his introduction to E, Burgess’ Translation of the Surya-siddhanta,
pp. xlvi and xlvii. The same values are given also in Great Books of
the Western World, vol. 16: The Almagest by Ptolemy (translated by
R. Catesby Taliaferro), Book XI, pp. 386-390.

4. See PSi, viii. 2. ,

5. See E. Burgess, fbid., introduction by P.C. Sengupta, p. x
and xlvii.


--- Page 96 ---
22 GITIKA SECTION { Gitika Sn,

the continuity of tradition of the school. It is remarkable that the first
line of the stanza :

araimtreagatcfeentteantqerea: |

at qatfaarmnat fagiig: akeasaa

qafafaaqesy aro: afeattaanr: |

ateargastafacaat srt au,

which has been quoted in full by Stryadeva, has been cited by
Bhaskara I too. This means that the passage was derived from some
earlier source, and the tradition mentioned in the stanza is definitely older
than Bhaskara I.

‘Whosoever might be the founder of the tradition, it is based on
the misunderstanding that the ascending nodes and the apogees, after
having started their motion from the first point of Aries at the
beginning of the current.Kalpa, moved exactly through the degrees
mentioned by Aryabhata I up to 499 A.D., the epoch mentioned by
Aryabhata I.

The motions of the nodes and the apogees of the planets ascribed
to tradition by Bhaskara I and the other commentators are much less
than their actual motions. For example, the node of Mercury, which
is the slowest, actually requires about 166000 years to complete a
revolution.’ Similar is the case with the apogees.

MANDA AND SIGHRA EPICYCLES
(Odd quadrants)

avait eee
UMA, W-F-4-2-F-Ah TATA TT: |
AIST TAS AT
af-yegr-ay-geataea po tI

10 The manda epicycles of the Moon, the Sun, Mercury, Venus, Mars,
Jupiter and Saturn (in the first and third anomalistic quadrants)

 

 

1. See C.A. Young, A Text-book on General Astronomy, Revised
edition, 1904, p. 337.

2. Bh. Pa. So. %f; others 4.
3. Bh, G, taT; all others ta.
4. Bh. and Go. #; all others a,


--- Page 97 ---
Verse 11-4 AEPICYCLES 28

11.

are, respectively, 7, 3, 7, 4, 14, 7 and 9 (degrees) each
multiplied by 43 (i-e., 31.5, 13.5, 31.5, 18, 63, 31.5 and 40.5
degrees, respectively); the fighra epicycles of Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, Venus and Mercury (in the first and third
anomalistic quadrants) are, respectively, 9, 16, 53, 59 and
31 (degrees) each multiplied by 4k (ie, 40.5, 72, 238.5, 265.5
and 139.5 degrees, respectively).

(Even quadrants)

Wea F-A-F-F-ST -
afeat Hala oq aga |

AU -FaA-FaA-HAPA-
salar, Peg FATTBTATECAT Mee

The manda epicycles of the retrograding planets (viz., Mercury,
Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn) inthe second and fourth
anomalistic quadrants are, respectively, 5, 2, 18, 8 and 13.
(degrees) each multiplied by 4} (.e., 22.5, 9, 81, 36 and 58.5
degrees, respectively) ; and the sighra epicycles of Saturna,
Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury (in the second and fourth
anomalistic quadrants) are, respectively, 8, 15, 51, 57 and 29
(degrees) each multiplied by 43 (i.e., 36, 67.5, 229.5, 256.5 and
130.5 degrees, respectively). 3375 is the outermost .circum-
ference of the terrestrial wind.’

The dimensions of the manda and Sighra epicycles are stated in

terms of degrees, where a degree stands for the 360th part of the
circumference of the deferent (kaksyavrtta). Thus, when an epicycle is
stated to be A°, it means that its periphery is A/360 of the circum-
ference of the deferent.

The following table gives the manda and Sighra epicycles as stated

above by Aryabhata I and also those given by Ptolemy :

— ee ae

I. The same values occur in A¢BA, vii. 13-16; LBh, i. 19-22;

KR, viii. 10-11.

2, The same value occurs in SiDV7, Goladhyaya, v. 2.


--- Page 98 ---
Da GITIKA SECTION { Gitiks Sn,

Table 9. Manda and Sighra epicycles of the planets
eee

 

Manda epicycles Sighra epicycles
Planet Aryabhata I Aryabhata I
Odd Even Ptolemy! Odd Even Ptolemy?
quadrant quadrant quadrant quadrant

 

Sun 13°50 —-13°.50 15°.00
Moon 31°.50 = 31°.50 31°.40

Mars 63°.00 = 81°.00 72°.00 238°.50 229°.50 237°
Mercury 31°50 = 22°.50 18°.00 139°.50 130°.50 135°
Jupiter 31°50 36°.00 33°.00 72°,00 67°.50. 69°
Venus 18°,00 9°.00 15°.00 265°.50 256°.50 259°
Saturn 40°50 58°.50 41°.00 40°.50 — 36°.00 39°

ee

It is noteworthy that in stating the dimensions of the manda
epicycles the planets have been mentioned in the order of decreasing
velocities (manda-gati-krama), whereas in stating the dimensions of the
Sighra epicycles they have been mentioned in the order of increasing
velocities (Sighra-gati-krama), It is perhaps done deliberately to emphasise
this point to the reader. The use of ablative in yathoktebhyah is meant
to indicate that in finding the manda anomaly the longitude of the apogee
is to be subtracted from the longitude of the planet. Similarly, the use
of the inverted forms uccasighrebhyah and uccacchighrat in place of
Sighroccebhyah and Sighroccat, respectively, shows, as remarked by
Bhaskara I and Someévara, that, in finding the Sighra anomaly, the
longitude of the planet has to be subtracted from the longitude of |
the sighrocca, ~

It may be pointed out that, according to Bhaskara I and
Lalla, the manda and Sighra epicycles stated above correspond to the
beginnings of the respective anomalistic quadrants as_ is evident
from the rules stated in MBh, iv. 38-39 (a-b), LBh, ii, 31-32 ©
and SiDVr, I, iii. 2 and explained in Bhaskara I’s commentary on

 

1. See Bina Chatterjee, op.cit., p. 284. In the Almagest of
Ptolemy, translated by R.Catesby Taliaferro, however, the Moon’s
epicyclic radius is stated as 51” 51’ which yields 31°.50 as the value of
the Moon’s epicycle. See p. 151.

2. See Bina Chatterjee, op. cit., p. 285.


--- Page 99 ---
Verse 11 EPICYCLES 25

A, iii. 122 The Kerala astronomer Sankaranarayana (A.D. 869) refers
to some astronomers (without naming them) who said that there
was also the view that the epicycles given by Aryabhata I corresponded
to the end-points of the anomalistic quadrants.’ The Kerala astronomer
Govinda-svami, who also refers to this controversy, is of the opinion
that sighra epicycles stated above correspond to the beginnings of the
respective anomalistic quadrants, but the manda epicycles stated above
correspond to the last points of the respective anomalistic quadrants,®
and, consequently, he has replaced the rules referred to above by
another rule {which has been quoted by Udayadivakara (1073 A.D.)
in his commentary on LBA, ii. 31-32. This controversy is due to the
fact that Aryabhata I himself does not specify whether the epicycles
given by him correspond to the initial points or last points of the
anomalistic quadrants.

Since the epicycles stated in the text correspond to the
beginnings of the odd and even anomalistic quadrants, their values at
other positions of the planets are to be derived by the rule of three.
Bhaskara I has prescribed the following rule .*

Let « and 8 be the epicycles (manda or Sighra) of a planet for
the beginnings of the odd and even anomalistic quadrants, respectively.

a em ea em

1. The commentator Stryadeva, too, is of this view. See his
comm, on A, iii, 24, p. 114.

2, See his commentary on LBh, ii, 32-33, where he writes :
wraafcfarcentst faad af Sarat 1

3. Govinda-svimi has been led to this conclusion by the fact
that in stating the dimensions of the manda epicycles Aryabhata I has
mentioned the planets in the order of decreasing velocities whereas in
stating the dimensions of the JSighra epicycles he has mentioned the
planets in the order of increasing velocities. See his comm. on M/Bh.
iv. 38-39 (a-5).

4, See MBh, iv. 38-39 (ab) LBh, ii. 31-32, An equivalent rule
is given in SiDVr, Grahaganita, iii. 2.

A. Bh. 4


--- Page 100 ---
26 GITIKA SECTION { Giciks: Sn.
Then

(i) If the planet be in the first anomalistic quadrant, say at P, and
its anomaly be @,

epicycle at pau4 (Oe) Rsin when «<p

—y t= 6) Rsin 0

R » when a>8

and (ii) If the planet be in the second anomalistic quadrant, say at Q,
and its anomaly be 90°-+4,

__(8—«) Rvers @

epicycle at Q=8 z , when «<8
=p (e— P) Rvers & , when &>>8,

Similarly in the third and fourth quadrants. The epicycles thus derived
are called true epicycles (spasta- or sphuta-paridhi).

But the tabulated manda epicycles or the true manda epicycles
derived from them are not the actual epicycles on which the true planet
in the case of the Sun and Moon or the true mean planet in the case
of the other planets is supposed to move. It is believed that they are the
mean epicycles corresponding to the mean distances of the planets. In
order to obtain the aciual epicycles, one should either apply the
formula : -

tabulated’ or true manda epicycle? x H

actual manda epicycle = R ’

 

where H is the planet’s true distance in minutes obtained by the process
of iteration (asakrtkelakarna or mandakarna),? or apply the process, of
iteration.‘ In the case of the sighra epicycles, however, the actual
epicycles are the same as the tabulated epicycles,

 

 

1. In the case of the Sun and the Moon.

2. Inthe case of the other planets, Mars etc,
3. See MBh, iv. 9-12 ; LBh, ii. 6-7,

4, See SiDV;,-Grahaganita, iii, 17.


--- Page 101 ---
Verse 11. J EFtICYCLES 27.

Brahmagupta criticises Aryabhata I for stating different epicycles
for odd and even anomalistic quadrants. Writes he :

“Since in (Aryabhaja’s) sunrise system of astronomy, the
epicycle ‘which is the multipler of the Rsine of anomaly
in the odd anomalistic quadrant is different from the epicycle
which is the multiplier of the Rsine of anomaly in the even
anomalistic quadrant, the (manda or Sighra) correction for the
end of an odd anomalistic quadrant is not equal to that for
the beginning of the (next) even anomalistic quadrant (as it
ought to be). This discrepancy shows that the differing
epicycles (stated by Aryabhata) are incorrect.

“Since the epicycle which is the multiplier of the Rsine
of anomaly in the odd anomalistic quadrant is different
from the epicycle which is the multiplier of the Rversine of
anomaly in the even anomalistic quadrant, the (manda or
Sighra) correction for the anomaly amounting to half a circle,
does not vanish (as it ought to). This discrepancy, too,
shows that differing epicycles (stated by Aryabhata) are
incorrect.!

“Since the epicycles (stated by Aryabhata) correspond to odd
and even anomalistic quadrants (and not to their first or
last points), the (so-called true) epicycle which is obtained
by multiplying the Rsine of anomaly by the difference of the
epicycles (for the odd and even quadrants) and dividing by
the radius and then subtracting the resulting quotient from or
adding that to the epicycle for the odd quadrant, according as
it is greater or less than the other, is not the correct
epicycle,

“If indeed there should be two different epicycles for the odd
and even anomalistic quadrants, then, why have not two

 

1, Let a and B® be the epicycles for the odd and even quadrants
and let the anomaly be equal to 180°. Then, according to Aryabhata I
(see A, iii. 22 (a-b)), the corresponding
bhujaphala=« x R sine 90°/360—B x Rvers 90°/360
= R/360—BR/360,
which is not equal to zero, because “8,


--- Page 102 ---
23 GITIKA SECTION [ Gitika Sn.

different epicycles been stated in the case of the Sun and the
Moon. It simply shows that the process of planetary correction
stated in (Aryabhata’s) Audayika-Tantra (i. e., Aryabhatlya)
does, in neither way, lead to a correct result.” :

Had Aryabhata I specified that the epicycles stated by him
corresponded to the first or last points of the respective anomalistic
quadrants, there would not have been any occasion for such a criticism.

The number 3375, denoting the length of the outer boundary
of the terrestrial wind, has reminded Bhaskara I of the following formula
which. also involves that number :

4 (180°— 6) 6. R
12 X 3375—(180°— 40°
where 6 is in terms of degrees. Bhaskara I thinks that the length of
the outer boundary of the terrestrial wind has been stated simply to
teach the method of finding the Rsine without the use of the Rsine Table
which is implied in the above formula.

Rsin @=

Brahmagupta (A.D. 628) misreads giyinaia as giyigasa and
unnecessarily criticises Aryabhata I for giving two different values of the
Earth’s diameter. Writes he :

“The circumference being (stated as) 3393 yojanas, the Earth’s
diameter becomes equal to 1080 yojanas. By stating the same
again as 1050 (yojanas) due to uncertainty of his mind, he (ie.,
Aryabhata I) has exposed his knowledge !’* ,
1. sitefaat a: ofefafasasentser: ae YET TT: |
aaferarant aat + qrafenadeay tt
fautsratse ge ofefinfors: sAreHASTTATT |
ame Gara + vata aenteag aah 1
aararigat ag: tfefafatrarea: TATTTT: |
seashratrat Aq Teaq Teal: Gfefaasra
farnanatife at afedt fis qadaeactatat |
wea.a safsafea eqefedlafanaeater i
BrSpSi, xi. 18-21
2. wafafr asaafea: sfx yeaa: gafaat Tea |
smreamy earfqanfarraaahrpaea tt
BrSpSi, xi 15.


--- Page 103 ---
Verse 12) SINE- DIFFERENCES 29

RSINE-DIFFERENCES
afe afe ofa afa afr af
efa eq wets fen cafe fem |
sats fen cea ate fea
a VE ST FAT GB BATAEAT Ul YU!

12. 225, 224, 222, 219, 215, 210, 205, 199, 191, 183, 174, 164,
454, 143, 131, 119, 106, 93, 79, 65, 51, 37, 22, and 7—
these are the Rsine.differences (at intervals of 225 minutes
of arc) in terms of minutes of arc.

The following table gives the Rsines and the Rsine-differences
at intervals of 225’ (or 3° 45’) according to Aryabhata I and the
corresponding modern values correct to three decimal places.

Table 10. Rsines and Rsine-differences at the intervals
of 225’ or 3°45’

 

Aryabhata I’s values. Modern Values
Arc Rsine  Rsine-differences Rsine Rsine-differences
225' 225° 225’ 224.856 224’ 856
450° 449' 224" 448'.749 223’.893
675" 671" 222' 670'.720 221'.971
900’ 890’ 219’ 889’.820 219.100
1125’ 1105’ 215" 1105’.109  * 215'.289
1350! 1315’ 210’ 1315’ .666 210.557
1575’ 1520’ 205’ 1520’ .589 204".923
1800’ 1719’ 199’ 1719’.000 198.411
2025’ 1910° 191’ 1910’.050 191.050
2250’ 2093’ 183’ 2092’ .922 182’.872

1. D.G. Su. freat; others free.

2. A. gata fs fea; Bh. Sa. gaa afe fea; Eger nar few.
Pa. Ra, Su. gt Tel eT ; So. feu safe fra fre,

3. Bh. WT; others T%.


--- Page 104 ---
30 - GITIKA SECTION { Gitika Sn.

 

 

Aryabhata I’s values Modern Values
Are Rsine Rsine-differences Rsine Rsine-differences
2475’ =. 2267’ 174' 2266’.831 173’.909
2700’ = 24311’ 164’ 2431’.033 164’ 202
2925’ = 2585" 154’ 2584’ 825 153’.792
3150’ = 2728’ 143°. 2727549 142’ .724
3375' 2859’ 131’ 2858’.592 131’.043
3600’ 2978 119° 2977’ .395 118’.803
3825’ , 3084’ 106° 3083’.448 © 106’.053
4050’ 3177 93’ 3176’.298 92’.850
4275’ 3256" 79" 3255'.546 79’ .248
4500’ 3321’ 65’ 3320'.853 65'.307
4725’ = 3372" 5I’ 3371'.940 51’.087
4950’ 3409’ 37' 3408’.588 36'.648
5175° 34311’ 22’ 3430'.639 22’.051
5400’ 3438’ 7 3438’.000 7 361

The twenty-four Rsines given in the Sarya-siddhanta’ are exactly
the same as those in column 2 above. P.C. Sengupta is of the opinion
that the author of the Sirya-siddhanta has based his Rsines on the
Rsine-differences given by Aryabhata I.?

The 16th Rsine, viz., 2978, was modified by Aryabhata II®
(c. A.D. 950) who replaced it by the better value 2977. The table of
Rsines given by Bhaskara II‘ (A.D. 1150) is the same as that of
Aryabhata II (c., A.D. 950).

Astronomer Sumati of Nepal, who lived anterior to Aryabhata II
(c. A.D. 950), gives® the values of the 4th and 16th Rsines as 889’ and
2977' respectively instead of 890' and 2978’ given by Aryabhata I.
Sumati’s table contains ninety Rsines at the intervals of one degree.

1. ii, 17-22.

2. See P. C. Sengupta’s introduction (p. xix) to E. Burgess’
Translation of the Surya-siddhanta,

3. See MSi, iii, 4-6.
4. See Si$i, Grahaganita, ii. 3-6.
5. Both in Sumati-mah@tantra and Sumati-karana.


--- Page 105 ---
Verse 13 ] ; AIM - a1

AIM OF THE DASAGITIKA-SUTRA.

qatar’ yaeatt ageat AAT |
rearuraay’ a arta fat Wt wal 23 Ul

[ xf sifeentara: arene: °

13. Knowing this Dasagitika-sutra, (giving) the motion of the Earth
and the planets, on the Celestial Sphere (Sphere of asterisms
or Bhagola), one attains the Supreme Brahman after piercing
through the orbits of the planets and stars.

This chapter is called ‘Ten Aphorisms in Gitika Stanzas’
(Dasagitikasttra). But instead of 10 gitika stanzas there are 11 gitika
stanzas (vss. 2-12) here. The question arises : Which of these are those
10 which contain the 10 aphorisms of this chapter ? This is indeed a
controversial question. For, according to the commentators Bhaskara I
(A.D. 629), Somegvara and SUryadeva (b. A.D. 1191), vss. 2-11 are
the ten stanzas which contain the 10 aphorisms ; vs. 12, in their
opinion, does not constitute an aphorism as it’ contains a table of
Rsine-differences which is easily derivable. According to the commen-
tator Paramesvara (A.D. 1431), however, vss, 3-12 are the 10 stanzas
containing the 10 aphorisms; vs. 2, in his opinion, is a definition and not
a mathematical aphorism.

There is, however, another difficulty. Is vs. 12 composed in the
gitika metre or in the arya metre ? According to Siryadeva, it is in the
aryd metre and, according to Paramesvara, it is in the gitika metre. In
’ fact, vs. 12 (in the form in which Suryadeva and Parameésvara state it)
is, as pointed out by H. Kern,* metrically defective, as it contains 20
syllabic instants instead of 18, in the fourth quarter :

1, C.D.E. Kr. Ra. Sa. vavitfrgaaag t
2, Kr. ventatkeart |

3, A, amitfasrga warty ; B.D. No colophon; E. ffrqat
aaray | ,

4, See H. Kern, Aryabhatiyam, Leiden (1874), p. 17, footnote,


--- Page 106 ---
32 Girma SECTION

Vrrrra ve vr vse vrsstrssa2r8tss

afa ufe ofe ufa ofa afe, sfe goa cafe fron vate free |

peostsStss §$ S S$ S SURE USS S

tafe few gar gt, et eT A Fa aa ca Gy Seo: n

It may be called a defective gitika, It is not a pure arya. How-
ever, in the forms in which vs. 12 has been stated by Bhaskara I and
Someivara, it is in the perfect gitika metre.

Bhaskara I’s reading

reat trrerreurrass tassaiss
afe wfe ofa ofe ofa afe, sfa gen ens fron rate fevr

Vr stSdarul ab tis s Sturarsss
safe fea gaa fe fea, ec am ca sa cat GG BATT: |

Some$vara’s reading

Prt trruerdrratrrrisstt &Ssatoss
uta «fa ofa afe ofa afe, sfe gen cafes fer vafer fewer )
Pr ss teuttwrs §S S StULTISss

tafe fa safes fea fea, enon ce act Gg aise: 1

We agree with Parame$vara in regarding vss. 3 to 12 as forming
the 10 gitika stanzas containing the 10 aphorisms of this chapter.


--- Page 107 ---
CHAPTER If
GANITA OR MATHEMATICS

INVOCATION AND INTRODUCTION
qa-F-TY-Ga-Ty-TA-
HITE RT-AT TAHT |
maaeheae faz
Ragsafad grag ie i

1. Having bowed with reverence to Brahma, Earth, Moon, Mercury,
Venus, Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn and the asterisms, Arya.
bhata sets forth here the knowledge honoured at Kusumapura.

Commenting on this stanza, Bhaskara I writes: ‘‘Kusumapura
is Pataliputra. (Aryabhata) sets forth the knowledge honoured there.
This is what one hears said: Indeed this SvG@yambhuva-siddhanta was
honoured by the learned people of Kusumapura (Pafaliputra), although
the Pauliga-, Romaka-, Vasistha- and Saurya-Siddhantas were also

(known) there. That is why (Aryabhata) says—‘the knowledge honoured
at Kusumapura’,”’

THE FIRST TEN NOTATIONAL PLACES
ah TNF Ud T aaa ga aga qar WyzaT |
mage Tee WMA wd eae wT li 2 ll

2. Eka (units place), dasa (tens place), Sata (hundreds place),
sahasra (thousands place), ayuta (ten thousands place),
niyuta (hundred thousands place), prayuta (millions place),
koti (ten millions place), arbuda (hundred millions place),

oor :

1, C. weary
2. Bh, adds 4

3. A-G. Gh, Ni, Pa. Ra. So. So. agetaa

 

A. Bh. 5 33


--- Page 108 ---
GANITA SECTION { Ganita Sn.

and yvynda (thousand millions place) are, respectively, from
place to place, each ten times the preceding.

The notational places are denoted by writing zeros as follows :
000000000 0

The zero on the extreme right denotes the units place, the next one

(on its left) denotes the tens place, the next one denotes the hundreds
place, and so on.

SQUARE AND SQUARING

ai: aaTaTT: Get | aemETeT das |

3. (a-b) An equilateral quadrilateral with equal diagonals and also
the area thereof are called ‘square’. The product of two equal
quantities is also ‘square’?

The commentator Parameévara explains the term samacaturasra
as follows : “‘That four-sided figure whose four sides are equal to one

another and whose two diagonals are also equal to each other is called
a samacaturasra.”’

By defining a square as the product of two equal quantities the
author has stated, by implication, the rule of squaring. That is, to find
the square of a number, one should multiply that number by itself.

The commentator Bhaskara I gives the terms varga, karan, krti,
vargana® and yavakarana as synonyms, meaning ‘square or squaring’. Of
these terms, Xarani, vargana and yavakarana are unusual. The term
yavakarana is derived from the fact that in Hindu algebra x" is

written .as yava (y@ standing for yavat-ravat, i.e., x, and va for varga,
t.e., square).‘

 

 

1. Cf. GSS, i. 63-68; PG, def. 7-8; GT, p. 1, vv. 2-3;
£ (ASS), Def. 10-11, pp. 11-12 ; GK, I, p. 1, wv. 2-3.

2. Cf. BrSpSi, xviii. 42; GSS, ii. 29; Si$e, xiii. 4; L (ASS),
Rule 19 (a), p. 19.

3. Use of the term yargana in the sense of multiplication has
been made by Bhattotpala also. See his comm. on BrJa, vii. 13.

4. See vol. II, Introduction, p. Ixxvii, sec. 4,


--- Page 109 ---
Verse 3] CUBE AND CUBING 35

The terms for multiplication according to Bhaskara T are:
samvarga, ghata, gunand, hatih and udvartana. For the multiplication of
equal quantities, Bhaskara I uses a special term, gata, meaning literally
‘moved’ > progressed>>raised. “Gunana is the multiplication (abhyasa)
of unequal quantities, and gata’, says he, “is the multiplication of equal
quantities.” The term dyvigata, according to him, means square,
trigata means ‘cube’; and so on. The dvigata of 4 is the product of 4
and 4, i.e., 4% the trigata of 4 is the product of 4 and 4 and 4, ie, 4;
and so on. According to this terminology, m* will be expressed by
saying ‘nth gata of m’, which corresponds to our present-day expression
‘nth power of m’, Following the same terminology, the roots have
been called gatamnla, Thus 4 is the gatamnula of 4°, the trigatamula of
48, and so on. In general, m is the ‘nth gatamula of m™’. This, too,
corresponds to our present-day expression ‘the nth root of m”™.

It is interesting to note that Bhaskara I finds fault with the
usual Hindu method? of squaring a number for the simple reason that
it implies the use of the squares of the digits 1 to9 but it neither states
them nor gives the method for obtaining them. Aryabhata I’s method,
according to him, is complete in itself.

CUBE AND CUBING

agra Tawra stab way My

3. (c-d) The continued product of three equals as also the
(rectangular) solid having twelve (equal) edges is called
a ‘cube’.4

The rule for cubing a number is implied as in the previous case.

Here also, Bhaskara I finds fault with the usual Hindu method®.
of cubing anumber for the reason that although it implies the use of

 

1. See vol. II, Bhaskara I’s commentary, p. 43.
2. For example, see PG, Rule 23.

3. F.G. graarfiga; Pa. Ra. srearateany
4.

Cf. BrSpSi, xviii. 42 ; GSS, ii. 43; SiSe, xiii 45 L
(ASS), Rule 24 (a), p. 23.
5. For example, see PG, Rule 27-28,


--- Page 110 ---
36 GANITA SECTION L Ganita Sn.

the cubes of the digits 1 to 9, it neither states them nor tells how
to find them out.

SQUARE ROOT

Wt ert faa T_aa |
ana as wed waaay FAT Meu

4.

4. (Having subiracted the greatest possible square from the last
odd place and then having written down the square root of the
number subtracted in the line of the square reot) always divide"
the even place (standing on the right) by twice the square root.
Then, haying subtracted the square (of the quotient) from the
odd place (standing on the right), set down the quotient at the
next place (i.e., on the right of the number already written in
the line of the square root), This is the square root. (Repeat
the process if there are still digits on the right).

The following example will illustrate the above rule.
Example, Find the square root of 55,225,

Let the odd and even places be denoted by o and e, respectively,
The various steps are then as shown below :

 

235.
oeoeo line of square root
55225
Subtract square 4
Divide by twice the root 4715 3
12
32

 

1. In dividing, the quotient should be taken as great as will
allow the subtraction of its square from the next odd place.

2. Cf. GSS, ii. 36; PG, Rule 25-26; GT, p.9, vs. 23; MSi,
xv. 6 (c-d)-7; SiSe, xiii. 5; L (ASS), p. 21, Rule 22; GK,I, p. 7,
lines 2-9,


--- Page 111 ---
Verse 5 j CUBE ROOT 37

 

32
Subtract square of quotient 9
Divide by twice the root 46) 23 2(5
230
25
Subtract square of quotient 25
0

The process ends. The square root is 235. The remainder being zero,
the square root is exact.

G.R. Kaye’s statement that Aryabhata I's method is algebraic in
character and that it resembles the method given by Theon of Alexandria,
are, as noted by W.E. Clark, B. Datta and A.N, Singh,’ incorrect.

CUBE ROOT
agar aa fear
figda gard Waa |
amheaqaahua:
Gren RAAT WaT Taq Uy il

5. (Having subtracted the greatest possible cube from the last
cube place and then having written down the cube root of the
number subtracted in the line of the cube root), divide the second
non.-cube place (standing on the right of the last cube place)
by thrice the square of the cube root (already obtained) ; (then)
subtract from the first non-cube place (standing on the right
of the second non-cube place) the square of the quotient multi-
plied by thrice the previous (cube root) ; and (then subtract)
the cube (of the quotient) from the cube place (standing on the
right of the first non-cube place) (and write down the quotient
on the right of the previous cube root in the line of the
cube root, and treat this as the new cube root. Repeat the
process if there are still digits on the right).

 

1. See Datta and Singh, History of Hindu mathematics, Part I,
p. 171. For details see A. N. Singh, BCMS, 18 (1927). See also
W.E. Clark, Aryabhatiya, pp. 23 f.

2. Cf. BrSpSi, xii. 7; GSS, ii. 53-54; PG, Rule 29-31; MSi,
xv. 9-10 (a-b) ; GT, p. 13, lines 18-25 ; SiSe, xiii. 6-7; L (ASS), Rule
28-29, pp. 27-28 ; GK, I, pp. 8-9, vv. 24-25.


--- Page 112 ---
38 GANITA SECTION [ Ganita Sn.

Beginning from the units place, the notational places are called
cube place, first non-cube place, second non-cube place, cube place,
first non-cube place, second non-cube place, cube place, and so on.
Indicating the cube, first non-cube and second non-cube places by c, n
and n’, their positions may be shown as below :

en nen nen nen ne

0000000 000000

The following solved example will explain the rule stated in the
above stanza ;

Example, Find the cube root of 17,71,561

cn nen ne — Wi
17715 61 ~ Jine of cube root

Subtract 1°

 

 

 

Divide by 3.1? 3) 07 2
6
17
Subtract 3.1.2? 12
31
Subtract 2° 8
Divide by 3.127 432)43 5
43 2
/ 3 6
Subtract 3,12.1° 36
01
Subtract 15 ]
0

The process ends. The required cube root is 121. The remainder
being zero, the root is exact.

AREA OF A TRIANGLE

fryaey wat ananlzigaradait |

6. (a-b) The product of the perpendicular (dropped from the vertex
on the base) and half the base gives the measure of the area of
a triangle. :


--- Page 113 ---
Verse 6 J VOLUME OF RIGHT PYRAMIDS 39

The term samadalakoti means ‘the perpendicular dropped from
the vertex on the base of a triangle’, ie., ‘the altitude of a triangle’.
Bhaskara I criticises those who interpret it as meaning ‘the upright
which bisects the triangle into two equal parts’, for, in that case, ‘the
above rule will be applicable only to equilateral and isosceles triangles.

The word phalaiarira means, according to Bhaskara I, phala-
pramana, i.e., ‘the measure or amount of the area’.

The above rule is applicable when the base and the altitude of a
triangle are known. When the three sides of a triangle are given but
the altitude is not known, Bhaskara I gives the following formulae to
get the segments of the base (called abadha or abadhantara) and
the altitude :

>

Fig. 1 ¢

o
a
2
<
a

x4 (a+ “—)

@ ya (a — S—*)

a

 

 

(3) p= Vet or VF
It is remarkable that Bhaskara I does not mention the formula :

‘Area of a triangle = 4/s (s—a)(s—b) (s—c), 2s=a+b+e,
although his contemporary Brahmagupta states it in his Brana-sphuta-
siddhanta

VOLUME OF RIGHT PYRAMIDS
Searyeaanhy aaa: Tea Ul

6. (c-d) Half the product of that area (of the triangular base) and the
height is the volume of a six-edged solid.

 

1. See BrSpSi, xii. 21.
2. AB.F, dante:

 


--- Page 114 ---
40 GANITA SECTION [ Ganita 8a,

This rule; which is based on speculation on the analogy of the area
of a triangle, is inaccurate. The correct formula is found to occur in
the Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta of Brahmagupta where it is stated as
follows :

“The volume of a uniform excavation divided by three is the
volume of the needle-shaped solid.’

That is to say,
Volume of a cone or pyramid =} (area of base) x (height).

Bhaskara I seems to be unaware of this formula, for he has no
comment to make on the rule of Aryabhata I. Even the commentators
Some$vara and Stryadeva (6. A.D. 1191) have nothing to add.

AREA OF A CIRCLE

@ e
aaa ASKAATITETAT TART |
7. (a-b) Walf of the circumference, multiplied by the semi.
diameter certainly gives the area of a circle.
That is,

area of a circle=4 x circumference x radius.

The same result in the form
circumference X diameter
4
occurs earlier in the Tattvarthadhigama-sntra-bhasya® of Umasvati
(Ist century A.D.). It occurs in the Brhat-ksetra-samasa® of Jinabhadra
Gani (A.D. 609) also.

area of a circle =

VOLUME OF A SPHERE

afaeta ed Tatar fara lo tt

7. (c-d) That area (of the diametral section) multiplied by its own
square root gives the exact volume of a sphere.

 

1. See BrSpSi, xii. 44.
2. Comm. iii. 11.
3. 1.7,


--- Page 115 ---
Verse] j VOLUME OF A SPHERE 41

That is, if r be the radius of a sphere, then, according to
Aryabhata I:

: o—
Volume of a sphere=4r°./7r?.

This formula is based on speculation, and, as noted by Bhaskara I,
is inaccurate, although called exact by Aryabhata I.

The probable rationale of Aryabhata I’s formula is as follows :

The area of a circle of radius r
=r
= area of a square of side /ar®. (vide vs. 9 a-b)

On the analogy of this, Aryabhata I concludes that

Volume of a sphere of radius r

=volume of a cube of edge / xr?
=a X faPeX Sar
ar xX Jar’.

Bhaskara I quotes the following formuia from some earlier work,
but he does not give it any credit and regards it as inferior to that
given by Aryabhata I:

Volume of a sphere of radius r= $ 7°.

It is noteworthy that Bhaskara I’s contemporary Brahmagupta,
who has criticised Aryabhata I even for his minutest errors, has not
been able to make any improvement on Aryabhata’s formula for the
volume of a sphere. Still more noteworthy is the fact that mathe-
maticians and astronomers in northern India, too, regarded Aryabhata
I’s formula as accurate and went on using it even in the second half
of the ninth century A.D. Brahmagupta’s commentator Prthidaka who
wrote his commentary on the Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta in 860 A.D. at
Kannauj, has prescribed’ Aryabhata I’s rule for finding the volume
of a sphere.

The formulae given by other Indian mathematicians are :

(1) Mahavira’s (850 A.D.) formula :*
Volume of a sphere=§ x 7% 7’.

 

—————.

1. In his comm. on BrSpSi, xi. 20.
2. See GSS, viii. 284.
A. Bh. 6


--- Page 116 ---
42 GANITA SECTION [ Ganita Sn.
(2) Sridhara’s (c. 900 A.D.) formula 2}

Volume of a sphere=4(1 4-1/18)r'.

The same formula is given by Aryabhata II (c. 950 A.D.)* and
Sripati (1039 A.D.)

All these formulae are approximate. The accurate formula was
given by Bhaskara II (1150 A.D.). ,

(3) Bhaskara II’s (1150 A.D.) accurate formula :4
Volume of a sphere =} x surface x diameter.

Bhaskara II also gave the following approximate formula, using
w=22/7;

. ;
Volume of a sphere==(Clemeter)” (1+1/21)

or 4(1+1/21)  approx.®

AREA OF A TRAPEZIUM

MAUTATT Wed aalaey wate F
Reaemagg ga Sanaa cl

8. (Severally) multiply the base and the face (of the trapezium)
by the height, and divide (each product) by the sum of the base
and the face : the results are the lengths of the perpendiculars
on the base and the face (from the point of intersection of
the diagonals). The results obtained by multiplying half the
sum of the base and the face by the height is to be known as the
area (of the trapezium).

 

See Tris, p. 39, Rule 56,

See MSi, xv. 108.

See SiSe, xiii. 46.

See L (Anandagrama), Rule 201 (c-d), p. 201.
See Z (Anandagrama), Rule 203 (e-/), p. 203.

wv nb


--- Page 117 ---
Verse 9 J ‘ AREA OF PLANE FIGURES 43

Let a, 6 be the base and the face, p the height and c,d the
lengths of the perpendiculars on the base and the face from the point
where the diagonals intersect. Then

Fig. 2

 

 

c==__9P
a+b
d= P_
a+b

area=4 (a+b) p.

The term ay@ma, meaning ‘breadth’, denotes the height of the
trapezium. The term vistara, meaning ‘length’, denotes the base and face
of the trapezium and so vistarayogdrdha means ‘half the sum of the
base and the face’.

The term parsve means, here, the two sides of a trapezium lying
on the two sides of the height. Evidently, they are the base and
the face.

AREA OF PLANE FIGURES

ada aatai warea aa Get aaa: |

9. (a-b) In the case of all the plane figures, one should determine
the adjacent sides (of the rectangle into which that figure can
be transformed) and find the area by taking their product.

According to Bhaskara I, this rule is meant both for finding the
area and for verifying the area of a plane figure. Writes he :

Doubt: “Now, the word al/ means ‘everything without exception’;
so, here, all (plane) figures are included, The area of all
(plane) figures being thus determined by this rule, the
statement of tke previously stated rules Eeccmes useless,


--- Page 118 ---
44 GANITA SECTION { Ganita Su.

Answer : That is not useless. Both the verification and the calculation
of the areas are taught by this rule. The areas of the previously
Stated figures have to be verified. The mathematicians
Maskari, Purana and POtana etc., prescribe the verification of
all (plane) figures (by transforming them) into a rectangular
figure. So has it been said :

‘Having determined the area in accordance with the prescribed
rule, verification should always be made by (transforming
the plane figure into) a rectangle, because it is only of the
rectangle that the area is obvious.’

‘The determination of the area of the (plane) figures which
have not been mentioned above is possible only by
transfcrming them into rectangles.’

The commentator Somesvara, following Bhaskara I, is of the |
opinion that the above rule is meant for the verification of the plane
figures. According to the commentators Stryadeva (6. 1191 A.D.),
Paramesvara (1431 A.D.), Yallaya (1480 A.D.), and Raghunatha-raja
(1597 A.D.), this rule is meant for finding the area of all plane
figures including those already considered above. According to the
commentator Nilakantha (c. 1500 A.D), however, this rule is meant
only for finding the area of those plane figures that have not been
considered heretofore.

There is, however, no doubt that the above rule is based on the
assumption that all plane figures can be transformed into a rectangle.

In his commentary, Bhaskara I has shown how to find the area
of a triangle, a quadrilateral, a drum-shaped figure, and a figure
resembling the tusk of an elephant, by transforming them into rectangles.

CHORD OF ONE-SIXTH CIRCLE

ges TeaASaT AeATA AT Tea Ul & Il

9. (c-d) The chord of one.sixth of the circumference (of a circle) is
equal to the radius.

ee.

1. Cf PSI, iv. 2 (ad),


--- Page 119 ---
Verse 11] COMPUTATION OF RSINE-TABLE 45

That is,
chord 60°=R,
or Rsin 30°=R/2.

CIRCUMFERENCE-DIAMETER RATIO
agra qanzge saz aZeray |
agazaenerearaal Tartare: tl go Il

10. 100 plus 4, multiplied by 8, and added to 62,000: this is the
pearly approximate measure of the circumference of a circle
whose diameter is 20,000.

This gives

diameter 20000

This value does not occur in any earlier work on mathematics,
and forms an important contribution of Aryabhata I.

It is noteworthy that Aryabhata I has called the above
value approximate.

COMPUTATION OF RSINE.TABLE GEOMETRICALLY
anaaatfane fra Fameaymeas |
anaasaaifa g feexcard ayearfe ee tl

11. Divide a quadrant of the circumferenc of a circle (into as many
parts as desired). Then, from (right) triangles and quadri.
laterals, one can find as many Rsines of equal arcs as one
likes, for any given radius.

Following Bhaskara I, we explain the method implied in the above
stanza by solving three examples.

_ Example 1. Find six Rsines at intervals of 15° in a circle of
radius 3438'.

Let Fig. 3 represent a circle of radius R (=3438’). Divide its
circumference into twelve equal parts by the points A, B, C, D, E,
F, ...,;L. Join BL. This is equal to R and denotes chord 60°. Half
of this, ie., MB, is Rsin 30°, Thus Rsin 30°=R/2=1719'. This is
the second Raine.


--- Page 120 ---
46 GANiTA SECTION L Ganita Sn.

 

Now, in the right-angled triangle OMB,

OM=/R=—(R/3y)= ve R=2978",

This is the fourth Rsine, viz., Rsin 60°.

Now, in the right-angled triangle AMB, AM=Rvers 30°
and MB=Rsin 30°.

“ AB= ¥ (Rsin 30°)* + (Rvers 307)
This is chord 30°. Half of this (/.¢., AN) is Rsin 15°. Thus
Rsin 15°=} / (Rsin 30°)?+ (Rvers 30°)2
= 890’,
This is the first Rsine.

Now, in the triangle ANO, AN=Rsin 15° and OA=R.

“.ON= «/ R? — (Rsin 15°)? = 3321’. This is the fifth Rsine,
d.e., Rsin 75°.

Since this is the fifth Rsine, Ze., an odd Rsine, it would not
yield any further Rsine.

Thus, five Rsines have been obtained by using triangles. Now,
we shall make use of the semi-square AOD, whose sides OA and OD
are cach equal to R. Therefore AD=4/2R, This is chord 90°, Half


--- Page 121 ---
Verse 11 j COMPUTATION OF RSINE-TABLE 47

of this (£e., AP) is Rsin 45°. Thus, Rsin 45°=R//2 = 2431’, This
is the third Rsine.
Thus we get all the six Rsines, which are as follows :
Rsin 15°==890' ;_ Rsin 30°=1719’ ; Rsin 45°==2431' ;
Rsin 60°=2978' ; Rsin 75°==3321’ ; Rsin 90°=3438",
Analysis. Verse 9 (c-d) gives the second Rsine. This yields the
first and the fourth Rsines. The first Rsine yields the fifth Rsine. The

fourth and the fifth Rsines do not yield any other Rsines. This process
ends here.

Again, the radius is the sixth Rsine. It yields the third Rsine.
The third Rsine being odd, does not yield and further Rsine. So this
process also ends.

Thus, from the second and the sixth Rsines, one gets all the
six desired Rsines.

Example 2. Find twelve Rsines at intervals of 7° 30’ in the circle
of radius R (=3438’).

»
Fig. 4 represents a circle of radius R (3438’). Join LB, as
before. This is equal to R and denotes chord 60°. Half of this is
Rsin 30°. Thus,

 

Rsin 30°=R/2=1719’,

This is the fourth Rsine.


--- Page 122 ---
As GANITA SECTION { Ganita Sn,

Now, from the right-angled triangle OMB, as before,

OM=4/ R?—(R/2)? =A r—278"

This is Rsin 60°, ie., the eighth Rsine.
Now, from the right-angled triangle AMB,
AB= (Rain 30° 4 Revers 30"
= (1719)? + (460° P= 1780".

This is chord 30°. Half of this, i.e, AN, is Rsin 15°. Thus,
Rsin 15°== 890’.

i

This is the second Rsine.

' Now from the right-angled triangle ANO

 

ON= ¥/(AO)?— (AN)? = R?—(Rs.n 15°)? =3321’.
‘This‘is Rsin 75°, ie., the tenth Rsine.

Now, from the right-angled triangle ANR, where R is the mid-
point of the arc AB, we have

 

AR= +/(AN)?+ (NR)? = ¥(Rsin 15°)? +(Rvers 15°)?
= J CHEE UIT = 898".
This is chord 15°. Half of this (e., AS) is Rsin 7° 30’. Thus,
Rsin 7° 30’= 449’,
This is the first Rsine.
Now, from the right-angled triangle ASO,
OS = 4/R?—(Rsin 7° 30’)? =3409".
This is Rsin (82° 30’), i.e., the eleventh Rsine.
Now, Rvers 75°=R—Rsin 15°, so that
chord 75°=4/(Rsin 75°)*-++ (Rvers 75°)? ==4186’.
Half of this is Rsin 37° 30’. This is the fifth Rsine.
Now, Rsin 52° 30'=4/R?—(Rsin 37° 30’) = 2728".
This is the seventh Rsine,
Thus, seven Rsines have been obtained by using triangtes.


--- Page 123 ---
Verse 11 J COMPUTATION OF RSINE-TABLE 49
Now, we make use of the semisquare AOD as before. Its side
OA and OD are each equal to R. Therefore,
AD=./2 R=4862’.
This is chord 90°. Half of this, 4e., AP, is Rsin 45°, Thus, Rsin 45°
== 2431’. This is the sixth Rsine.
Now, from the right-angled triangle APT,
AT= 4/(Rsin 45°)? + (Rvers 45°)?= 2630’.
This is chord 45°, Half of this is Rsin 22° 30’. This is the third
Rsine. ;
Hence, as before,
Rsin 67° 30’'= 4/ R?— (Rsin 22° 30’)? ==3177’.
This is the ninth Rsine. ,

Thus, we get all the twelve Rsines, which might be set out as
follows :

Rsin 7° 30'==449' Rsin 37° 30’== 2093’ Rsin 67° 30’=3177'
Rsin 15°=890' Rsin 45°=2431' Rsin 75°=3321'
Rsin 22° 30’=1315’ Rsin 52° 30’ ==2728' Rsin 82° 30’=3409’
Rsin 30°=1719’ Rsin 60° = 2978’ Rsin 90° =3438'

Analysis. Stanza 9 (c-d) gives the fourth Rsine. This fourth
Rsine yields the eighth and the second Rsines. The eighth Rsine does
not yield any new Rsine. The second Rsine yields the tenth and the
first Rsines. The first Rsine yields the eleventh Rsine, and the tenth
Rsine yields the fifth and the seventh Rsines. These Rsines do not
yield any new Rsines, So this process ends here.

Again, the radius is the twelfth Rsine. This yields the sixth
Rsine, and the sixth Rsine yields the third and the ninth Rsines. These
do not yield any further Rsines. So the process ends here.

Thus, from the fourth and the twelfth Rsines one gets all the
twelve desired Rsines.

Example 3. Find the twentyfour Rsines at the equal intervals
of 3° 45’ in the circle of radius R ( = 3438’).

4. Bh 7


--- Page 124 ---
50 GANITA SECTION [ Ganita Sn.

From stanza 9 (e-d)
8th Rsine=R/2=1719',
This yields :
16th Rsine= ./R2—(R]2)?_ =2978'
4th Rsine=4}4/ (Rsin 30°)?-+-(Rvers 305"
= 890’.
The 16th Rsine does not yield and new Rsine. The 4th Rsine yields :
20th Rsine= ./R?—(890’)? =3321’
2nd Rsine =449'
The 20th Rsine yields :
10th Rsine==2093'
The 2nd Rsine yields :
ist Rsine = 225'
22nd Rsine = 3409’
The Ist Rsine yields ;
23rd Rsine = 3431’
and the 22nd Rsine yields :
lith Rsine = 2267’.

The 23rd Rsine does not yield any new Rsine.

The 11th Rsine yields :
13th Rsine== 2585’.

The 13th Rsine does not yield any new Rsine.

The 10th Rsine yields :
5th Rsine=1105'
14th Rsine =2728',

The Sth Rsine yields :
19th Rsine =3256',.

The 14th Rsine yields :
7th Rsine=1520',

The 7th Rsine yields :
17th Rsine = 3084’,

The 17th Rsine does not yield any new Rsine.


--- Page 125 ---
Verse 12 J DERIVATION OF RSINE-DIFFERENCES 51

Now, we start with :

24th Rsine==3438’.
This yields :

12th Rsine= 2431’.
This 12th Rsine yields :

6th Rsine= 1315’.
The 6th Rsine yields :

3rd Rsine= 671’

18th Rsine= 3177’.

The 3rd Rsine yields :

21st Rsine =3372'
and the 18th Rsine yields :

9th Rsine=1910’.

The 9th Rsine yields :
15th Rsine = 2859’,

Thus, we get all the twentyfour Rsines,. -

DERIVATION OF RSINE-DIFFERENCES

TAP TTIT ed Ged fda |
qaaASTAREATI | NeTAT eR I

12. The first Rsine divided by iiself and then diminished by the
quotient gives the second Rsine-diffcrence. The same first
Rsine diminished by the quotients obtained by dividing each of
the preceding Rsines by the first Rsine gives the remaining
Rsine-differences.

Let R,, R,, ...Rg, denote the twentyfour Rsines and 8; (=R,),
By 8a. oe » 5a4 denote the twentyfour Rsine-differences. Then,
according to the above rule,

Rit Ret +R
Bagi Ri — ee Tn


--- Page 126 ---
52 , GANITA SECTION L Ganita Sn.

The above translation is based on Prabhakara’s interpretation of
the text. The same interpretation is given by the commentators
Somegvara, SUryadeva (b. 1191 A.D.), Yallaya (1480 A. D.) and
Raghunatha-raja (1597 A.D.). It is interesting to note that this interpre-
tation is also in agreement with the rule stated in the Sarya-siddhanta
(ii. 15-16), as interpreted by the commentator Ranganatha (1603 A.D.),
viz..

Rya=R, +R: — Rut Rat ont Re
1

Datta and Singh, following the commentator Parameévara
(1431 A.D.), have translated the text as follows :

“The first Rsine divided by itself and then diminished by the
quotient will give the second difference. For computing any
other difference, (the sum of) all the preceding differences is
divided by the first Rsine and the quotient is subtracted from
the preceding difference. Thus, all the remaining differences
(can be calculated).

 

That is
R
mn]
|
8+8,+...48
Bug =8y — Ee \ (2)
|
R
3. — Re {
or * Ry . J

This is also how the commentator Some$vara seems to have
interpreted the text.

One can easily see that (1) and (2) are equivalent.

The commentator Nilakantha (c. 1500 A.D.) interprets the text
as follows :

“The first Rsine divided by itself and then diminished by the
quotient gives the second Rsine-difference. To obtain any other

 

1. History of Hindu mathematics, Part III, (unpublished). Also
see A.N. Singh, ‘Hindu Trigonometry’, Proc, Benaras Math, Soc.,
yol. 1, N.S,, 1939, p. 88.


--- Page 127 ---
Verse 12] DERIVATION OF RSINE. DIFFERENCES 53

Rsine-difference, divide the preceding Rsine by the first Rsine —
and multiply the quotient by the difference between the first
and second Rsine-differences and subtract the resulting product
from the preceding Rsine-difference.”

That is,

R,

Ry : (3)
By 41 = 3, (R,/ Ry ) (&— 2).

 

8, =R\—

This is the accurateform of the formula, and reduces to the
previous form because, according to Aryabhata I,

8, —3,==225 — 224= 1.
The following is the trigonometrical rationale of (3) :

8,—Se41={Rsin nh—Rsin (n—1)h}—{Rsin (n+1)h—Rsin nh},
where == 225’
= 2 Rsin nh—{Rsin (n41)h+Rsin (n—1)h}

2 Rsin nh. Reos A

== 2 Rsin nh—
Rsin 7 R
= 2 Rsin nh (R—Reos h) h)
. R
$,—8,)
= Rein nh, =)
Rsin Rsin h
= (R,!Ri)(8:—33);
because
3,—8a==2 Rsin he. (R—Reos A)

The geometrical rationale as given by the commentator
Nilakantha (c. A.D, 1500) is as follows :

Let AOB be a quadrant of a circle, OA being horizontal and OB
vertical, Let the arc AQ be equal to nh, where h—=225’; and let the
arcs PQ and QR be each equal to A. Let Land M be the middle
points of the arcs PQ and QR, so that the are LM is also equal to &.


--- Page 128 ---
54 GANITA SECTION { Ganita Sn.

Let LU, QV, MW ‘and RX be the perpendiculars on OA;
PE, LF and QD perpendiculars on QV, MW and RX, respectively. Also
let PQ, LM and QR be joined by straight lines.

B

Fig, 5

   

Oo XxX W VU A

Now, the triangles QEP and OUL are similar. Therefore
QE=(PQ/OL). OU.
Similarly,
RD=(QR/OM). OW=(PQ/OL). OW.
Therefore, by subtraction,
QE —RD=(PQ/OL)(OU—OW)= (PQ/OL). WU. (4)

Again, since the triangles MFL and OVQ are similar,
FL= (QV/0Q). LM,
or WU=(PQ/OL). QV. (5)
From (4) and (5),
QE—RD=(PQ/OL)*. QV.
In other words,

8, da41={(2 Rsin h/2)/R}. R, (6)
In particular, ,

Si— 82={(2 Rsin A/2)/R}. Ry (7)
From (6) and (7),
34 Sn 4a = (R,/R,)(8—32).


--- Page 129 ---
Verse 13 J THE SHADOW-SPHERE 55

‘CONSTRUCTION OF CIRCLE, ETC., AND TESTING
OF LEVEL AND VERTICALITY

vi way aed frat a was TBI |
AAT Ta AAYVITET WIHT Ul 23 Il

13. A circle should be constructed by means of a pair of compasses ;
a triangle and a quadrilateral by means of the two hypotenuses
(karna). The level of ground should be tested by means of
water; and verticality by means of a plumb.!

The two hypotenuses (karnas) in the case of a triangle are the
two lateral sides above the base ; in the case of a rectangle, the two
diagonals ; and in the case of a trapezium, the two lateral sides? The
reference is to the usual methods of constructing a triangle when the
three sides (7.e., the base and the two lateral sides) are given; a
parallelogram, when one side and two diagonals called the hypotenuses
are given ; and a trapezium, when the base, height and the two lateral
sides (called hypotenuses) are given.

As regards testing the level of the ground, Bhaskara I observes :

“When there is no wind, place a jar (full) of water upon a
tripod on the ground which has been made plane by means of
eye or thread, and bore a (fine) hole (at the bottom of the jar)
so that water may have continuous flow. Where the water
falling on the ground spreads in a circle, there the ground is in
perfect level ; where the water accumulates after departing
from the circle of water, there it is low ; and where the water
does not reach, there it is high.”

 

1. The same rule occurs in BrSpSi, xxii. 7; SiDVy, II, viii. 2
(c-d). Also see Sui, iii. 1; SiSi, I, iii. 8.

2. See examples set by BhaskaraI and Stryadeva in their
commentaries on A, ii. 6 (a-b).


--- Page 130 ---
56 -GANITA SECTION { Ganiea Sn.

RADIUS OF THE SHADOW-SPHERE
TST TMT sraraia dd Far |
aaa amyl ferrary erzae7 tt ee Il

14. Add the square of the height of the gnomon to the square of its
shadow. The square root of that sum is the semi-diameter of
the circle of shadow.

“The semi-diameter of the circle of shadow is taken here”, says
the commentator Bhaskara I, “in order to accomplish the rule of three,
viz. ‘If these are the values of the gnomon and the shadow corresponding
to the radius of the circle of shadow, what will correspond to the radius
of the celestial sphere ?? Thus are obtained the Rsines of the Sun’s
altitude and zenith distance. At an equinox, these. are called the
Rsines of colatitude and latitude (respectively).” Cf. LBh, iii, 2-3.

As regards the shape of a gnomon, Bhaskara I informs us that the
Hindu astronomers differed from one another, Some took a gnomon
with one third at the bottom of the shape of a rigat prism on a square
base, one third in the middle of the shape ofa cylinder, and one
third at the top of the shape of a cone. Others took a gaomon of the
shape of a right prism ona square base. The followers of Aryabhata I,
writes Bhaskara 1, preferred a cylindrical gnomon, made of excellent
timber, free from holes, knots and scars, with large diameter and height.
In order to get a prominent tip of the shadow, a cylindrical needle
(of height greater than the radius of the gnomon) made of timber
- or iron was fixed vertically at the top of the gnomon in the middle.
Such a gnomon being large and massive was unaffected by the wind ;
being cylindrical, it was easy to manufacture ; being surmounted by
a needle of small diameter, the tip of the shadow was easily perceived.

A gnomon was generally divided into 12 equal parts called
angulas, but, according to Bhaskara I, there was no such hard
and fast rule. A gaomon could be of any length with any number
of divisions.

1. Cf. KK, I, iii, 10; Bh, iii. 4.


--- Page 131 ---
Verses 15-16 ] GNOMONIC SHADOW 87

GNOMONIC SHADOW DUE TO A LAMP-POST —
UEETe VeRIsthiat Tegysnlstray |
aeaed at ara gat TE eyarhe u ey

.15. Multiply the distance between the gnomon and the lamp-post (the
latter being regarded as base) by the height of the gnomon and
divide (the product) by the difference between (the heights of)
the lamp-post (base) aad the gnomon. The quotient (thus
obtained) should be known as the length of the shadow measured
from the foot of the gnomon.?

In Fig. 6, let AB be the lamp-post, CD the gnomon, and E the
point where AC and BD produced meet. Then DE is the shadow cast
by the gnomon due to light from the lamp at A.

Let FC be parallel to BD. Then comparing the similar
triangles CDE and AFC, we have
A

F Cc
Fig. 6

D

_ FCxCD

DE
AF . ?

E
= wBDx cD .
Hence the rule. AB-—CD

TiP OF THE GNOMONIC SHADOW FROM THE LAMP.POST AND
HEIGHT OF THE LATTER

arayied grata aia Her |
USHIAT Bel al HrarTgat gat Hala |i 2g Ul

1. This rule occurs also in BrSpSi, xii. 53; GSS, ix. 404 ;
SiSe, xiii. 54; L (Anandasrama), Rule 234, p. 243; GK, II, p. 208,
‘Rule 14 (a-5).

2. Bh. arfad ; others atfrat 3. A-G. Gh. atfe:

4. B. Tr. at mat
A.Bh. 8

 


--- Page 132 ---
58 GANITA SECTION L Ganita Sn.

16. (When there are two gnomons of equal height in the same
direction from the lamp-post), multiply the distance between the
tips of the shadows (of the two gnomons) by the (larger or
shorter) shadow and divide by the larger shadow diminished by
the shorter one ; the result is the upright (i.c., the distance of
the tip of the larger or shorter shadow from the foot of the lamp-
post). The upright multiplied by the height of the gnomon and
divided by the (larger or shorter) shadow gives the base (i.e., the
height of the lamp.post).!

In Fig. 7, AB is the lamp-post (base), BC or BD is the upright,
LM and PQ are the gnomons of equal height.

A
Fig. 7 P
B MC Q p
We have
AB BD . AB_ BC .
= fi) — = — (ii)
PQ QD LM MC
Since PQ=LM, therefore
BD _ BC CD ves
eo (iii)
QD MC QD—MC
Hence from (iii), (i) and (ii), we have
p—-CPxQDd
QD—MC (1)
BC= CDxMC
QD-MC (2)
and Ape: BPXPQ _ BCXLM
QD MC (3)

 

 

1, This rule reappears in BrSpSi, xii. 54; Z (ASS), Rule
239, pp. 246-47 ; GK, vol. 2, p. 210, Rule 16.


--- Page 133 ---
Verse 17 J TWO THEOREMS 59

THEOREMS ON SQUARE OF HYPOTENUSE AND
ON SQUARE OF HALF-CHORD

a ¢ c of 1

AVAT YAMA: BATA BAT: Az? |

Fa weiss: 3 ag sq I eo tl

17. (Ina right-angled triangle) the square of the base plus -the
square of the upright is the square of the hypotenuse.
In a circle (when a chord divides it into two arcs), the product
of the arrows of tbe two arcs is certainJy equal to the square
of half the chord
Of the two theorems stated above, the first one is “the theorem of

the Square of the Hypotenuse”, as Hankel has called it. This theorem
has been known in India since very early times. Baudhdyana
(c. 800 B.C.), the author of the Baudhayana-sulba-satra, has enunciated
it thus :

“The diagonal of a rectangle produces both (areas) which its

length and breadth produce separately.’

This theorem is now universally associated with the name of the Greek
Pythagoras (c. 540 B.C.), though “no really trustworthy evidence exists
that it was actually discovered by him.” It were certainly the Hindus
who enunciated the property of the right-angled triangle in its most
general form. No other ancient nation is known to have made any
attempt in this direction.

_ The second theorem states that if, in a circle, a chord CD and a
diameter AB intersect each other at right-angles at E, then

Cc

Fig. 8

AE x EB= CE.

1. Pr. qorniqa: adtad: weieg oa
2. Baudhayana-Sulba- sutra, i. 48.
3. Heath, Greek Mathematics, I, p. 144 f,


--- Page 134 ---
60 GANITA SECTION { Ganita Sn:

This result easily follows from comparison of the similar triangles
CAE and CEB.

This second theorem occurs earlier in the works of Umiasvati'
(Ist century A.D.). It has been mentioned by Jinabhadra Gani?
(A.D. 609) and Brahmagupta (A.D. 628) also.*

ARROWS OF INTERCEPTED ARCS OF INTERSECTING CIRCLES
TAA F TA MATT aaag TRA |
gata’ arma wea U2 Il

18. -(When one circle intersects another circle) multiply the
diameters of the two circles each diminished by the erosion, by
the erosion and divide (each result) by the sum of the diameters
of the two circles after each has been diminished by the
erosion : then are obtained the arrows of the arcs (of the two
circles) intercepted in each other.®

_ Let two circles intersect at P and Q and let ABCDE be the line
passing through the centres of the two circles. Then BD is the erosion
(grasa), and BC, CD are the arrows of the intercepted arcs.

P

Fig. 9 A E

Q
The rule states that
(AD—BD). BD

BC = OOS
(AD—BD)-+ (BE—BD)

(1)

—

 

1. See Tattvarthadhigama-sutra, ‘iii. 11 (comm.) and‘ Jambn-
dyipa-sam@sa, ch. iv.

2. See Brhat-ksetra-samasa, i. 36.
3. See BrSpSi, xii. 41.

4, Gh. gam aa

5. A.D. Pa. arvaat; E, arraadt

6. This rule occurs also in BrSpSi, xii 42; GSS, vii. 2314;
GK. vol. 2, p. 76 (Rule 68).


--- Page 135 ---
Verse 19 -. SERIES IN A, P. 61

BE—BD). BD
and CD = DOE (BEBO) - (2)
These formulae may be derived as follows :
Since AC X CD=BCXCE, therefore
(AD—BD + BC) (BD—BC) = BC(BE —BC) (3)
(AD—CD)CD= (BD-——CD)(BE—-BD + CD) (4)

Solving (3) for BC, we get (1), and solving (4) for CD,
we get (2).

SUM (OR PARTIAL SUM) OF A SERIES IN A.P,
asd ct alec aragatae ABTAET |
reqiuaticad aaarerd Teraeay Ul 28 Il

19. Diminish the given number of terms by one, then divide by two,
then increase by the namber of the preceding terms (if any),
then multiply by the common difference, and then increase by
the first term of the (whole) series : the result is the
arithmetic mean (of the given number of terms). This multi-
plied by the given number of terms is the sum of the given
terms. Alternatively, multiply the sum of the first and last
terms (of the series or partial series which is to be summed up)
by half the number of terms.® .

Let an arithmetic series be
at(a+d)+(a+2d)+...--
Then the rule says that
(1) the arithmetic mean of the m terms

(a-+-pd)+(at+p+! 4) +... +fat+(pt+n—1) dy
=a+( ne ) d,

ee

 

1. Bh. age Aeay
2 C. saTearerrt

3. Cf. BrSpSi, xii 17; GSS, vi- 290; PG, Rule 85; MSi,
av. 47; SiSe, xiii. 20; Z (ASS), Rule 121, p. 114.


--- Page 136 ---
62 GANITA § SECTION [ Ganita Sn.

(2) the sum of the n terms

(a+pd)+(a+p+ld)+ ... +{a4+(p+n—1) d}
= nfot+(S 74 dat.

In particular (when p=0)
(3) the arithmetic mean of the series
a+ (a+d)+...+{a+(n—Nd}

n—l]
= d
a+ 2

 

 

(4) the sum of the series
av(at+d)+...+{a+(a—1) d}

=n fa+ aa a}

 

Alternatively, the sum of # terms of an arithmetic series with A
as the first term and L as the last term

n
where 4 (A+L) is the arithmetic mean of the terms.

The commentator Bhaskara I says :

Several formulae are severally set out here. They are obtained
by suitable combination of the text as follows :

Formula 1. “Istam vyekam dalitazn uttaragunarm samukham”’ iti madhya-
dhantnayanartham sttram.

n—l

ie., a+ 5

d is the formula for the arithmetic mean of n terms.

 

Formula 2. “Madhyam istagunitam” iti istadhanam,

 

iLe., {a + — a n gives the sum of n terms.

Formula 3, “Istamn vyekam sapurvam uftaragunam samukham”’ dtyantyo-
pantyadidhandnayanartham sutram.

Le. at+{(I—1)-+(n—)}d is the formyla for the nth term.


--- Page 137 ---
Verse 20.) SERIES 1 A. P. 63

Formula 4, “Istarn vyekam dalitam sapurvam uttaragunam samukham
istagunitam’’ ityavantarayathestapadasamkhyanayanartham
sitram.

 

1.€., nfa + ( mit p ) a} is the formula for the sum of x”

terms beginning with the (p+ 1)th term,

Formula 5, “Adyantapadardhahatam” iti istadhanam.

i.e, 4n(A+L) is the sum of x terms, A and L being the first and
last terms.

Series in A.P. are found to occur in the Taittiriya Samhita (vii. 2.
12-17; iv. 3. 10), the Vajasaneva Samhita (xvii. 24.25), the Paiicaviméa
Brahmana (xviii. 3) and other Vedic works. In the Brhaddevata'
(500-400 B.C.), we have the result

2+3+4+4+4 ... ... +1000== 500499,

Formal rules for finding the sum etc. of a series in A.P. occur in
the Bakshali Manuscript (c. 200 A.D.) and other Indian works on
mathematics written subsequently,

NUMBER OF TERMS OF A SERIES IN A.P,

TaseRGuag syMET peg |
yt fegugt @aald werdq Ui 2 |

20. The number of terms (is obtained as follows) : Multiply (the
sum of the series) by eight and by the common difference,
increase that by the square of the difference between twice the
first term and the common difference, and then take the square
root ; then subtract twice the first term, then divide by the -
common difference, then add one (to the quotient), and then
divide by two.?

Let S be the sum of the series

a+ (a-+d)+(a+-2d)+ (a-+3d)-++......to 1 terms,

re ae

 

_.1. The Brhaddevata has been edited in original Sanskrit with
English translation by Macdonell, Harvard, 1904.

2._ Cf. BrSpSi, xii. 18; GSS, vi. 294; PG, Rule 87; MSi,
XV. 50; SiSe, xiii. 24; L (ASS), Rule 128, p. 118.


--- Page 138 ---
64 GANITA SECTION [ Ganita Sn.

Then
n= af /ad8+ Ga-dy =a yy |
SUM OF THE SERIES 1+(1+2)+(1+24+3)+... .. TO N TERMS

TAATTIAHARTTAT: |
qanaa: a faata: Gaaeaal Figet at i ze

21. Of the series (upaciti) which has one for the first term and one
for the common difference, take three terms in continuation, of
which the first is equal to the given number of terms, and find
their continued product. That (product), or the number of
terms plus one subtracted from the cube of that, divided by 6,
gives the citighana.

The term upaciti or citi is used in the sense of a series in general.
The series 1+2+43--...... + 1, which has one for the first term and
one for the common difference is called ekottaradi-upaciti. The sum of
this series is generally called sankalita. Bhaskara I calls it sankalana.

The term citighana is used in the sense of the sum of the series

1+ (142) +(1+243)+ 0.00. - (1)

to any number of terms. This sum is generally called sankalita-sankalita.
Bhaskara I has called it senkalana-sankalana,

The above rule gives the sum to a” terms of the series (1) in
two forms : ——
f s_
(i) ant V)G+2) ang (iy (n+ 1?—(2+1) ;
6 6
The term citighana literally means ‘the solid contents of a pile
(of balls) in the shape of a pyramid on a triangular base’. The pyramid
is so constructed that there is 1 ball in the topmost layer, 1-++2 balls in
the next lower layer, 14+-2+3 balls in the further. next lower layer,
and soon. Inthe ath layer, which forms the base, there are

1+2-+3-+...--2 balls.

1. Cf. BrSpSi, xii. 19; PG, Rule 103 (c-d) ; SiSe, xiii,21; L
(ASS), Rule 118, p. 112.


--- Page 139 ---
Verse 22 1 SERIES Nt AND 3N3 65

The number of balls ia the solid pyramid,
ie., citighana=S,+S,+..-+5,+....>5
where S,=1-243+4...47.

The base of the pyramid is called upaciti, so
upacitiz=14+243+4...+7.

Bhaskara I illustrates the rule by the following example:

Example. There are (three pyramidal) piles (of balls) having
respectively 5, 8 and 14 layers which are triangular. Tell me the number
of units (i.e., balls) (in each of them).

The above citighana is a series of figurate numbers. The Hindus
are known to have obtained the formula for the sum of the series of
natural numbers as early as the fifth century B.C. It cannot be said
with any certainty whether the Hindus in those times used the represen-
tation of the sum by triangles or not. The subject of piles of shots and
other things has been given great importance in the Hindu works, of
which all contain a section dealing with citi (‘piles’). It will not be a
matter of surprise if the geometrical respresentation of figurate numbers
is traced to Hindu sources.

SUM OF THE SERIES %N* AND =N3

ar-aeg-taral ware Greater qaISeT: |
atatiaa: @ waq, Palaadt gafaiara tt 22 I

22. The continued product of the three quantities, viz, the number
of terms plus one, the same increased by the number of terms,
and the number of terms, when divided by 6 gives the sum of
the series of squares of natural numbers (vargacitighana).
The square of the sum of the series of natural numbers (citi)
gives the sum of the series of cubes of natural numbers
(ghanacitighana).1

es ereememnies

 

1. . Cf. BrSpSi, xii. 20; PG, Rule 102-3 (a-b), SiSe, xiii. 22 ;
L (ASS), Rule 119, p. 113.

A. Bh, 9


--- Page 140 ---
6 GANITA SECTION — t Ganita 8.

The term vargacttighana is used in the sense of the stm of the
series

PH tt ob

ie., the sum of the series of squares of natural numbers ; and the term
ghanacitighana is used in the sense of the sum of the series

P4434 1. fn,

7.e,, the sum of the series of cubes of natural numbers. Bhaskara I has -

scale Saleen oF

calied these sums by the terms vargasankalana and ghanasankalana, |
respectively. Other mathematicians have called them vargasankalita and —

ghanasankalita, respectively. According to the above rule
Py ate pat ONE) | ang

P4+2+4+3*+ ... tnt=(1-+243+4+ ... +n)?
__§ 2(n+1))?
={ 2 j

The term vargacitighana literally means ‘the solid contents of a
pile (of balls) in the shape of a pyramid on a square base’. It is so
constructed that there is 1 ball in the topmost layer, 2? balls in the next
lower layer, 3* balls in the further next lower layer, and so on, In the
nth layer from the top, which forms the base of the pile, there are
n® balls.

The term ghanacitighana similarly means ‘the solid contents of a pile
(of cuboidal bricks) in the shape of a pyramid having cuboidal layers’.
It is so constructed that there is 1 brick in the topmost layer, 2° bricks
in the next lower layer, 3° bricks in the further next lower layer, and so
on. Inthe nth layer (from the top), which forms the base of the pile,
there are n® bricks, n bricks in each edge of the cuboidal base.

Bhaskara I illustrates Aryabhata’s rule stated in the text by the
following examples ;

Example 1. There are (three pyramidal) piles on square bases
having 7, 8 and 17 layers which are also squares. Say the number of
units therein (i.e., the number of balls or bricks, of unit size used
in each of them).


--- Page 141 ---
Vossen 23-24 PRODUCT AND BACTORS @

Example 2. There are (thrée pyramidal) piles having 5, 4 and
9 cuboidal layers. They are constructed of cuboidal bricks (of unit
dimensions) with one brick in the topmost layer, (Find the number of
pricks used in each of them).

PRODUCT OF FACTORS FROM THEIR SUM AND SQUARES

aqcreer fe anig fagrata aiarrhq |
amet wary frre mea 83

23. From the square of the sum of the two factors subtract the
sum of their squares. One-half of that (difference) should be
known as the product of the two factors.

That is,

axpe (AFBI OEB)

QUANTITIES FROM THEIR DIFFERENCE AND PRODUCT

frafagarg daalg qaeaeatia agareqay |
waged alt a TURRTt sheaq Il Re Il

24. Multiply the product by four, then add the square of the
difference of the two (quantities), and then take the square
root. (Set down this square root in two places). (In one
place) increase it by the difference (of the two quantities), and
(in the other place) decrease it by the same. The results thus
obtained, when divided by two, give the two factors (of the
given product).*

 

That is, if
x—y=a
xy =b5,
then ,
x= /4b+a* +a
2
y= vitae ;

———,
LL

1. Cf. BrSpSi, xviii. 99.


--- Page 142 ---
GANITA SECTION L Ganita Sn,

INTEREST ON PRINCIPAL

gene ane KATATE AH TAT |
aye Fart aad aya ney tl By ll

Maltiply the interest on the principal plus the interest on that
interest by the time and by the principal; (then) add the
square of half the principal ; (then) take the square root ;
(then) subtract half the principal ; and (then) divide by the
time : the result is the interest on the principal.®

25.

The problem envisaged is : A principal P is lent out at a certain
rate of interest per month. At the expiry of one month, the interest
‘TY’ which accrues on P in one month is given on loan at the same rate of
interest for T months. After T months ‘I’ amounts to A.
is to find ‘I’ when A is given.

The problem
The solution to this problem is
j= _VPTA+(@/2)—(P/2)
T :

as stated in the above rule.

RULE OF THREE

AUTARKAUY THAT A BAT |
wey TaTUUtad aeiesarnaiys KAT | 2s UI

In the rule of three, multiply the ‘fruit? (phala) by the
‘requisition’ (iccha) and divide the resulting product by the
‘argument’ (pramana). Then is obtained the ‘fruit corresponding
to the requisition’ (icchaphala).*

26,

1, B. tay crossed out and aya substituted.

2. Bh. and So. read Wye qardht srg eaTa TTA ; others read
At TNA Bags Aly a_ATAT |

3. Brahmagupta gives a more general rule. See BrSpSi, xii. 15.
4. Similar rules occur in BrSpSi, xii. 10; GSS, v. 2 (i);
PG, Rule 43 ; MSi, xv 24-25 (a-b); GT, p. 68, vs. 86; SiSe, xiii. 14;
L (ASS), p. 71, vs. 73; GK, I, p. 47, vs. 60.


--- Page 143 ---
Verse 27} RULE OF THREE ‘69
Example 1. If A books cost P rupees, what will R books cost? =~
Here A is the ‘argument’, P the ‘fruit? and R the ‘requisition’.
So the required answer is

PXR rupees.

 

Example 2. If the interest on Rs. 100 for 2 months is Rs. 5, find
the interest on Rs, 25 invested for 8 months.

Here we have two arguments, viz, Rs. 100 and 2 months ; and

two requisitions viz., Rs. 25 and 8 months, The fruit is Rs. 5. So the

required answer is

25X85

a 5 .
100 x2 or 5 rupees

SIMPLIFICATION OF THE QUOTIENTS OF FRACTIONS

Bats Wea wale TUALAMTENTAA |

27. (a-b) :The numerators and denominators of the multipliers and
divisors should be multiplied by one another.

For example,

(i)

ale[os

a

(ii) ~* da bd (ac) (fh)
eye e@ (bd) (es)
f oh fh

This rule is a sequel to the previous rule of three, and relates to the
case when the argument, fruit and requisition are each fractional, What
is meant int his rule is that when the fractional fruit and the fractional
requisition have been multiplied and a fractional product is obtained,
then the product should be treated as the multiplier and the argument
as the divisor. The numerator of the multiplier should then be multi-
plied by the denominator of the divisor and the denominator of the

 


--- Page 144 ---
70, GAMITA SECTION { Ganita. Sn,

multiplier by the numerator of the divisor. The commentator Suryadeva
explains : ‘Here by the word gunakara (multiplier) are meant the fruit
and the requisition, because, being the multiplicand and the
multiplier, both of them are mutually multipliers. By the word
bhagahara (divisor) is meant the argument, The (product of the)
denominators of the fruit and the requisition should be multiplied by
the (numerater of the) argument, and the product of (the numerators
of) the fruit and the requisition should be multiplied by the denomi-
nator of the argument.”

REDUCTION OF TWO FRACTIONS TO A COMMON
DENOMINATOR

FTI FH wed aq aa tl yo tl

27. (c-d) Multiply the numerator as also the denominator of each
fraction by the denominator of the other fraction 3 then the
(given) fractions are reduced to a common denominator.t

That is,

a cad be ad+be
pa ha bd bd

 

’

a c__ad be _ ad—be

—— = =

b d bd bd bd *

Example, Add}, } and }.

Reducing 4 and 4 to a common denominator and adding, we get
_ 6 2 64+2_,
Pimp tp ay =F
Now adding % and 4, we get

iti= 27) =

37 =

a

1. Similar rules occur in BrSpSi, xii. 2 (a-b); PG, Rule 36;
MSi, xv. 13 (c-d) ; GT, p. 30, line 16 ; SiSe, xiii. 11 (a-b); L (ASS),
p. 28, lines 9; GK, I, p. 9, ys. 26 (a-b). Also see GSS, iii. 55 (a-b).


--- Page 145 ---
Verse 29 ] EQUATIONS 7

METHOD OF INVERSION

HUH ATE AMTEUA ATT YURNT: |
qi Far aistaaiscsa: daze’ Fraga tl Re I

28. Inthe method of inversion multipliers become divisors and
divisors become multipliers, additive becomes subtractive and
subtractive becomes additive.‘

Example. A number is multiplied by 2; ‘then increased by 1;
then divided by 5; then multiplied by 3; then diminished by 2; and
then divided by 7; the result (thus obtained) is 1. Say what is the
initial number.

Starting from the last number 1, in the reverse order, inverting
the operations, the result is

1x7, + 2, +3, x5, —l, +2, ie. 7.

UNKNOWN QUANTITIES FROM SUMS OF ALL BUT ONE
Tee UB TeRTt fed Ta |
aaa wa gi arad az ara Ul Re ll

29, The sums of all (combinations of ) the (unknowa) quantities
except one (which are given) separately should be added
together ; and the sum should be written down separately
and divided by the number of (unknown) quantities less one :
the quotient thus obtained is certainly the total of all the
(unknown) quantities, (This total severally diminished by the
given sums gives the various unknown quantities).

 

 

1. Gh, Go. Ni, Pa. So. ataget &

2. Ra, #t FT

3. C, dave wate fata

4. Similar rules occur in BrSpSi, xviii. 14; GSS, vi. 286 ;
PG, Rule 78; MSi, xv.23; GT, p.65, vs. 83; SiSe, xiii. 13;
L (ASS), p. 42, vs.48; GK,I, p..46, lines 13-16.

5. Bh. watay

6. Cf. GSS, vi. 159; GK, I, p. 85, Rule 28,


--- Page 146 ---
92 ” GANITA sECTION t Ganita $n.
That is if
(Xa-+xa-+ ... 4+ x,)— x= a1
(Mixa ... +2x,)—x¥2=ae

(Mi-p maf... +x, )——x, =a, .

then
Mb $y ST ant FM
so that
x= MFT os Heng .
n—l
xan ERE oe Fe
n—1
x, a Mt Fong

n—l *
X1, Xe, «++» X, being the unknown quantities and ai, as, ..., ds the

given sums.

UNKNOWN QUANTITIES FROM EQUAL SUMS

giaaraty frase ca: geri erase |
aad ghaaryged aadgd at qeaq’ tl go I

30. Divide the difference between the rupakas with the two
persons by the difference between their gulikas. The quotient
is the value of one gulikd, if the possessions of the two persons
are of equal value.?

 

 

1. A.B. E-G. waft adert

2. The verse may also be translated as: ‘The difference of
the known amounts (ripaka) relating to. the two persons should be
divided by the difference of the coefficients of the unknowns (gulika) :
The quotient will be the value of the unknown ; if their possessions be
equal.” See B. Datta and A.N. Singh, History of Hindu Mathematics,
part H, p. 40.

For similar rules see BrSpSi, xviii, 43; SiSe, xiv. 15; BB (ASS),
p. 113, Rule 89 ; NB, II, Rule 5.


--- Page 147 ---
Verse 31 } MEETING OF TWO MOVING BODIES 73

Two persons are equally rich. Of them, one possesses a gulikas
and 5b riipakas (coins), and the other possesses ¢ gulikds and d
rupakas. The rule tells how to find the value of one gulika in terms
of rupakas.

Algebraically, if

ax--b=cx-+d,

then
d—b
a—c *

 

x=

The term gulika stands for ‘a thing of unknown value’. “By
the term gulika,’ writes Bhaskara I (629 A.D.), ‘‘is expressed a thing of
unknown value.” Gulika and yavattavat (commonly used in Hindu
algebra for an unknown) are used as synonyms. Bhaskara I writes :
“These very gulikas of unknown value are called yavattavat,”

The term rapaka means a coin. ‘The r2paka’’, writes Bhaskara I,
“is (a coin such as) dindra etc.”

MEETING OF TWO MOVING BODIES

ava fataat aentargataiat 2 |
meaeay wea fravmararadteat 1 Be A

31. Divide the distance between the two bodies moving in the
opposite directions by the sum of their speeds, and the distance
between the two bodies moving in the same direction by the
difference of their speeds; the two quotients will give the
time elapsed since the two bodies met or to elapse before they
will meet.®

1. B. F.N. faadt at; Go. Pa. So. faat &
2. Ni, waat

3. Problems on meeting of travellers occur in Bakhshali
Manuscript and later works. BM, Ill, Ais, 3 recto, Rule 14; Ba,
9 verso; B,, 4 recto.; GSS, vi. 326}; PG, Rule 65, Exs. 81-82,

A. Bh. 10


--- Page 148 ---
74 GANITA SECTION { Ganita Sa,
The following cases may arise :
Case 1. When the two bodies are moving in the opposite directions.

If the bodies are facing each other, i.e., if they have not already
met, the distance between them when divided by the sum of their
velocities will give the time to elapse before they meet,

If the bodies have already met and moving away from each other,
the distance between them when divided. by the sum of their velocities
will give the time elapsed since they met each other.

Case 2. When the two bodies are moving in the same direction.

‘If the fast-moving body is behind, i.¢., if they have not already
met, the distance between them when divided by the difference of their
velocities will give the time to elapse before they meet.

If the slow-moving body is behind, i.e., if they have already met,
the distance between them when divided by the difference of their
velocities will give the time elapsed since they met each other.

PULVERISER

The rule stated in vss. 32-33 below is meant for solving a residual
pulveriser (sagra-kutjakara), i.e., a problem of the following type :

A number leaves 1 as the remainder when divided by 5, and
2 (as the remainder) when divided by 7. Calculate what that
number is,

RESIDUAL PULVERISER

airemaret erargamartarty |
TNT AfayTaaeat fea 1 32 UI

aes qarcaqyaayeaiat TI |
afremrgaye fe gamahremgay i 32 1

1. A. No colophon; B.D. efa afraqre:; C. eff afiraqe:
ward: BE, afraqreg ; F, xfe afvatear garaq t


--- Page 149 ---
Verses 32-33 ] RESIDUAL PULVERISER 15

32-33. Divide the divisor corresponding to the greater remainder
by the divisor corresponding to the smaller remainder.
(Discard the quotient). Divide the remainder obtained (and
the divisor) by one another (until the number of quotients of
the mutual division is even and the final remainder is-small
enough). Multiply the fina] remainder by an optional number
and to the product obtained add the difference of the remainders
(corresponding to the greater and smaller divisors ; then
divide this sum by the last divisor of the mutual division.
The optional namber is to be so chosen that this division fs
exact. Now place the quotients of the mutual division one
below the other in a column; below them write the optional
number and underneath it the quotient just obtained. Then
reduce the chain of numbers which have been written down
one below the other, as follows): Multiply by the last but one
number (in the bottom) the number just above it and then add
the number just below it (and then discard the lower number)..
(Repeat this process until there are only two numbers in the
chain). Divide (the upper number) by the divisor corresponding
to the smaller remainder, then multiply the remainder obtained
by the divisor corresponding to the greater remainder, and then
add the greater remainder: the result is the dvicchedagra .
(i.e., the number answering to the two divisors). (This is also
the remainder corresponding to the divisor equal to the product
of the two divisors).!

It may be pointed out that when the quotients of the mutual
division are odd in number, the difference of the greater and smaller
remainders is subtracted from the product of the last remainder of the
mutual division and the optional number.

To illustrate the above rule, we solve the. following example.

Example. Find the number which yields 5 as the remainder
when divided by 8, 4 as the remainder when divided by 9, and 1 as the
remainder when divided by 7.

1. The same rule occurs in BrSpSi, xviii. 3-5,


--- Page 150 ---
%6 “ GANITA SECTION . { Ganita Sn.

i) (ii) (iii)
Remainder 5 4 1
Divisor 8 9 T-

To begin with, we apply the process of the pulveriser on the first
two pairs of remainder and divisor, viz., (i) and (ii).

Dividing 8 (the divisor corresponding to the greater remainder) by
9 (the divisor corresponding to the smaller remainder), we get 8 as the
remainder and 0 as the quotient. We discard the quotient 0 and divide
the remainder 8 and the divisor 9 mutually until there are even number
of quotients and the final remainder is small :

8)9(1
8
“1)8@
‘8

0

We choose 1 as the optional number and multiply the remainder
0 by it and add 1 (the difference of the greater and smaller remainders)
to it. The result is 1, Diving this 1 by 1 (the final divisor of the
mutual division), the quotient obtained is 1. Now, we write the
quotients of the mutual division, viz., 1 and 8 one below the other and
below them the optional number 1 and then the quotient 1 just obtained.
Thus we get

— CO me

Reducing this chain, we successively get

1
8 9 9
1
1


--- Page 151 ---
verses 32-33 1 NON-RESIDUAL “PULVERISER 1

Now dividing the upper number 10 by 9 (the divisor corresponding
to the smaller remainder), we get 1 as the remainder. Multiplying
this 1 by 8 (the divisor corresponding to the greater remainder),
we get 8 Adding the greater remainder 5 to this 8, we get 13.

This 13 is obviously the number which divided by 8 leaves 5 as
remainder and divided by 9 leaves 4 as remainder. This number is}
called dvicchedagra because this answers to two divisors,

This 13 is also the remainder corresponding to the divisor 8x9
(i.e., 72).

We now apply the process of the pulveriser on the following pairs
of remainder and divisor 1

(i) (ii)
Remainder 13 1
Divisor 72 7

Proceeding as above, we get 85. This is called tricchedagra
because this answers to three divisors (viz., those in the example). One
can easily see that 85 leaves 5 as remainder when divided by 8, 4 as
remainder when divided by 9, and 1 as remainder when divided by 7.

. This is the least integral solution of the problem. The general
solution is 8X9X7 m-+85, i.e. 504 m-+-85, m=0, 1, 2, 3, ..-

The commentators Bhaskara I, Saryadeva and others have also
interpreted vss. 32-33 as arule for solving a non-residual pulveriser
' (nlragra-kutfakara), ie., a problem of the following type :

Problem: 11 is multiplied by a certain number, the product is dimi-
nished by 3, and the difference thus obtained being divided
by 23 is found to be exactly divisible. Find the multiplier
and the quotient.

NON-RESIDUAL PULVERISER
Verses 32-33 may be translated also as follows :

32-33, Divide the greater number (denoting the divisor) by the
smaller number (denoting the dividend) (and by the remainder


--- Page 152 ---
78 GANITA SECIION . { Genita Sn,

obtained the smaller number and so on. Dividing the greater
and the smaller numbers by the last non-zero remainder of the
mutual division, reduce them to their lowest terms.!) Divide
the resulting numbers mutually (until the number of quotients
of the mutual division is even and the final remainder is small
enough). Multiply the final remainder by an optional number
and to the product obtained add the (given) additive (or subtract
the subtractive)? (Divide this sum or difference by the last
divisor of the mutual division. The optional number is so
chosen that this division is exact. Now place the quotients
of the mutual division one below the other in a column 3; belew
them write the optional number and underneath it the quotient
just obtained. Then reduce this chain of numbers as follows),
Multiply by the last but one number (in the bottom) the number
just above it and then add the number just below it (and then
discard the lower number). (Repeat this process until there
are only two numbers in the chain). Divide (the upper namber
by the abraded greater number and the lower number) by the
abraded smaller number. (The remainders thus obtained are
the required values of the unknown multiplier and quotient),

In the above translation, the word agra has been taken to mean
‘number’ and agrdntara to mean ‘the given additive or subtractive’.

The operations mentioned in adhikagracchedagunam dvicchedagram
adhikagrayutam ate, as remarked by the commentator Stiryadeva, not
needed in the case of a non-residual pulveriser, Writes he : “Adhi-
kagracchedagunam ityadi niragrakuttakaresu nopayujyate,””

This rule might be illustrated as follows :

Example. Solve

16 x—138 __

487 7

—_—— _—

 

1. The additive or subtractive should also be reduced by
dividing it by the last non-zero remainder.

.2. By the additive and subtractive here is?meant the reduced
additive and reduced subtractive,


--- Page 153 ---
Verses 32-33 ] NON-RESIDUAL PULVERISER 99

Here, the divisor=487, dividend=16 and subtractive 138.
Since 487 and 16 are already prime to each other, we proceed with their
mutual division. The mutual division runs as follows :

16) 487 (30
480°
1) 16 (2
44
2X 16—138= 14 (2
14
0

‘

The cnain of the quotients oy the mutual division, the optional number
and the final quotient is reduced as follows :
30 30 4696
2 154 154
76 76
2

Dividing 4696 by the divisor 487, the remainder is 313 : this is
the value of x. Dividing 154 by the dividend 16, the remainder is 10 3
this is the value of y.

Hence x=-313, y=10.
This is the least integral solution of the problem.

The general solution is
x= 487 A+313
y= 16A4+ 10
where A=0, 1, 2,3...

The commentator Someévara, instead of interpreting the text in
a different way. in the case of a non-residual pulveriser, interprets a
non-residual pulveriser itself as a residual pulveriser.’ Thus, he

 

 

1. This is really the method of Brahmagupta. See BrSpSi,
xviii. 7.


--- Page 154 ---
80 GANITA SECTION [ Ganite Sa,
interprets the non-residual pulveriser

aX-—C =y

b , '
as the residual pulveriser
N=dy+c=ax+0,
in which
c is the adhikagra (i.e., the greater remainder),

b is the adhikagrabhagahara (i.e., divisor corresponding to the
greater remainder),

0 is the @nagra (i.e., the smaller remainder), and

a is the (anagrabhagahara, i.e., the divisor corresponding to the
smaller remainder), ,

To illustrate this method, we solve the non-residual pulveriser of
Example 2, viz.,
16x—138 _
47,—~C*
by converting it into a residual pulveriser.

This is equivalent to the residual pulveriser
N=16x-+- 0=487y-+ 138,

where the greater remainder==138, the corresponding divisor 487,
smaller remainder=0, and corresponding divisor= 16. To solve this,
we proceed as in Example 1.

The mutual division runs as follows :

16) 487 (30
480
7) 16 (2
14
276
6
12+ 138 optional number=2

140(70
140

0


--- Page 155 ---
Verses 32-33 ] NON-RESIDUAL PULVERISER 81

We discard the first quotient and write down the ether quotients
of the mutual division one below the other in a column, and underneath
them the optional number and the final quotient ; and then reduce the
chain of numbers obtained, as follows :

2 154
3 «76 76
2

70

Dividing 154 by 16 (the divisor corresponding to the smaller
remainder), the remainder is 10; this 10 multiplied by 487 (the divisor
corresponding to the greater remainder) gives 4870; this increased by
138 (the greater remainder) gives 5008. This is the value of N (the
dvicchedagra) The values of x and y are, therefore, the following :

 

5008
x= i6 ==313
5008—138 _
487 10.

The rationale of Aryabhata I’s rule is as follows :
Method 1. Since both residual and non-residual pulverisers
reduce ultimately to an equation of the form
ax+c=by, (1)

it is sufficient to start with this equation.

Let the mutual division of a and 4 (6>>a) yield
a) b (qy

1) a Qs

rs

The mutual division may be continued to any number of even
quotients. For convenience, we have stopped after obtaining the
second quotient.

A, Bb. 11


--- Page 156 ---
82 GANITA SECTION : { Ganita Sn.

The mutual division shows that the application of pulverisation

to equation (1) gives rise to the equation
ax-+e=ny

and then to rxfte=nyp.

Now if x=m, y=qz be solution of (3), then

x=m
y= mgt 4%

is a solution of (2), and

y=ma+4s }

x= (1g, +9s)Qi+m

is a solution of (1).

1. For, if x=m, y=qs be a solution of (3), then
ram+c = r1qs,
or (a—ngq)mt+c=ngs-
2. ¢=n (mget gs) —am.
Application of this value of ¢ reduces (2) to
ax-+n (mqs+ q3)—am=ny,
or a (x—m)=ni_y—( (mage + 9s)],

of which a solution is evidently
x=m
yomgat 4s,

Application of the same value of ¢ reduces (1) to
ax +r (ge + qs)—am = by,
or ax+(b—agi)(ngat gs) —am=by,

or a[x—f{(mgs+-9s)qi + m}] =F[y—Cngn +a),

of which a solution evidently is

y=mdat 9s
x=(mgstga)qi-tm,

(2)
(3)

(4)


--- Page 157 ---
Verses 32-33 ] NON-RESIDUAL PULVERISER 83

One can easily see that m is the so called ‘optional number’ (mati),
gs the quotient obtained on dividing mra--e by m1, and that the solution
(4) is the same as obtained by reducing the chain

1
2
m

q3

the successive steps of reduction of the chain being

1 q (mq,+4s)41-+m
q mg+qs 9,14

m m

qs

Method 2. Proceeding with the equation
ax+te=by (1)

and mutually dividing @ and b(b>a) up to the second quotient as
before, we get

a) b(n
ny) a (4

ra
Since from the mutual division,
b=aqytn
the equation (1) becomes
ax-+c=(an+n)y,.
or x=qy+%, Where ax,;=ny—e
ax,-be==ny (2)

where x=qytu. (3)

And since from the mutual division

a="datla


--- Page 158 ---
84 GANITA SECTION

{ Ganita Sn.
the equation (2) becomes
(rigatrdatc=ny,
OF 92X\--y,=y where 7y,=1,%,+e,
PX fe=n); (4,
where Y=aX,t), (5)

Now if x,= m (mati), y= q, be a trial solution of (4), then

(5) gives y=qm-+q; |

and (3) gives x=, (qam-+ qs). (6)

Hence a solution of equation (1) is given by (6).
Note. When the mutual division is carried to more than two

quotients, the proof is similar, See Datta and Singh, History of
Hindu Mathematics, Part H, pp. 95 ff.


--- Page 159 ---
CHAPTER Ul
KALAKRIYA
OR
THE RECKONING OF TIME

[ The aim of this section is to teach theoretical astronomy
as far as the determination of true positions of
the planets is concerned. ]

TIME DIVISIONS AND CIRCULAR DIVISIONS

aq ‘ara ataiageietay wag a arate |
qheaieay feaa: ater frarfeat viet tie

qaaatey wettarfeardt, 4 7 ATA: |
et area, safrareaat wag | 2 Ul

1. A year consists of 12 months. A month consists of 30 days. A

day consists of 60 nadis. A nadi consists of 60 vinadikas
(or vinddis).4

2. A sidereal vinadika is equal to (the time taken by a man in
normal condition in pronouncing) 60 long syllables (with
moderate flow of yoice) or (in taking) 6 respirations (pranas).

This is the division of time. The division of a circle (liz. the
ecliptic) proceeds in a similar manner from the revolution.‘

a ie

1, So, gaara:

2. Bh. feaar.

3. Su. Pa, sfseeg
4

See supra, i. 6, p. 13, above.

85


--- Page 160 ---
86 KALAKRIYA SECTiON { Kalskriya Sn,

These definitions may be stated in tabular form as follows :

Table 11. The Time divisions

1 year ==12 months
1 month =30 days
1 day =60 nadis (or nddikéas)

1 nadi (nadika) = 60 vinadikas
1 sidereal vinadika=60 long syallables or

= 6 respirations (pranas)

Teble 12, The Circular divisions

1 revolution = 12 signs’

1 sign =30 degrees

1 degree ==60 minutes (kalas)
1 minute =60 seconds (vikalas)
1 second =60 thirds (fatparas).

“The term ksetra means bhagola (‘Sphere of the asterisms’)”,
writes Bhaskara I, More accurately, it means ‘the circle of the asterisms’
or the ‘ecliptic’.

The term Asefra is also used in the sense of ‘a sign of the zodiac,'

But in the present context it means a circle.

CONJUNCTIONS OF TWO PLANETS IN A YUGA

WIT SAAT Asa ar Kare |

3. (a-b) The difference between the revolution-numbers of any two
planets is the number of conjunctions of those planets in a yuga.

VYATIPATAS IN A YUGA

tagivagaina: aaa sqdtara: U2 Ul
3. (c-d) The (combined) revolutions of the Sun and the Moon added
to themselves is the number of Vyatipatas (in a yuga).

The phenomenon called vyatipata is of two types: (1) Ldta-
vyatipdta, and (2) Vaidhrta-vyatipata. The former occurs when the

 

1. Cf. ufe-ada-qg-e-ahe wad dardaiscaat: 1 (Jyotiscandrarka
by Rudradeva Sharma, N. K. Press, Lucknow, i. 165, gloss),


--- Page 161 ---
Verse 4 1 ANOMALISTIC AND SYNODIC REVOLUTIONS 87

um of the (tropical) longitudes of the Sun and the Moon amounts to
180 degrees and the latter when that sum amounts to 360 degrees.’
Thus, in one combined revolution of the Sun and the Moon there
occur two vyatipatas.

The conception of the phenomenon of vyatipasa is very old.
It occurs in the Vedanga-Jyautisa’ (c. 1400 B.C.) which states the number
of vyatipatas in the yuga of 5 years. Italso occursin the Jaina
astronomical work Jyotiskaranda® (514 AD.) where the rule for
finding the number of vyatipatas in a yuga of five years is formulated.

ANOMALISTIC AND SYNODIC REVOLUTIONS

sea: eaTMaRan’ asada: |
4. (a-b) The difference between the revolution-numbers of a planet
and its ucca gives the revolutions of the planet’s epicycle
(in a yuga).

What is meant is that the difference between the revolution-
numbers of a planet and its mzadocca (apogee) gives the anomalistic
revolutions of that planet; and that the difference between the
revolution-numbers of a planet and its Sighrocca gives the synodic
revolutions of that planet.

The number of the anomalistic revolutions of the Moon in a yuga,
according to Aryabhata is :
=Revolution-number of the Moon minus Revolution-number
of the Moon’s apogee
=5,77,53,336—4,88,219
= 5,72,65,117.

The period of one anomalistic revolution of the Moon is, likewise, equal
to 1,57,79,17,500/5,72,65,117, ie@. 2755459 days, or 274 13” 18” 36°.6

 

1. See Khanda-khadyaka, i. 25.

2. vs. 19. The date of the Vedanga-Jyautisa may be derived
from the position of the summer solstice (viz, the first point of the
nakgatra Dhanistha) mentioned in that work.

 

3. Gathas 291-93. For details, see Vedanga-jyautisa, edited
with English translation and Sanskrit commentary by R. Shamasastry,
Mysore, 1936, vs. 19, notes and Sanskrit commentary.

4. G. Su. faatfear:


--- Page 162 ---
88 ” KALARRIYA SECTION [ Kalakriy& Sn.

approx. According to modern astronomers, it is equal to 27% 13°
18” 33°.1,

The following table gives the synodic revolutions (in a yuga) and
the synodic periods (niramnSa-kala) of the Moon and the planets according
to Aryabhata I, Ptolemy and the modern astronomers.

Table 13. Synodic revolutions and synodic periods

 

Synodic revolutions

 

 

Planet . according to Synodic period in days
Aryabhata I AryabhataI Ptolemy Modern
Moon 53433336 29-53058 29-53059 29-53059
Mars 2023176 1779-92125 779-9428 779-936
Sighrocca of Mercury 13617020 1158783 = 115°8786 = 115-877
Jupiter 3955776 398-8895 398-8864 398-884
Sighrocea of Venus 2702388 583-8975 584-0000 583-921
Saturn 4173436 378-0859 378-0930 378-092

JOVIAN YEARS IN A YUGA

TEAMU UMMA WAT Ue ll

4, (c.d) The revolution-number of Jupiter multiplied by 12 gives the
the number of Jovian years beginning with Asvayuk (in a yuga).

A Jovian year is the time taken by Jupiter in passing through one
sign of the zodiac. The following table gives the names by which the
Jovian years are called when Jupiter passes through the various signs.

Table 14, Names of the Jovian years

 

 

Sign Jovian year Sign Jovian year
1 Aries Asvayuk 7 Libra Caitra

2 Taurus Kartika 8 Scorpio Vaisakha
3 Gemini Margaégirsa 9 Sagittarius Jyestha

4 Cancer Pausa 10 Caricorn Asadha

5 Leo Magha 11 Aquarius Sravana

6 Virgo Phalguna 12 Pisces Bhadrapada

 

—— eee

1, B. qoned @ ame; Bh. cfs awerqsrar |


--- Page 163 ---
Verse 4] -JOVIAN YEARS 89

The Jovian years were named after the asterisms in which
Jupiter rises heliacally in the various signs. The following table gives,
according to Varahamihira (d. A.D. 587),' the asterisms in which Jupiter
is normally seen to rise heliacally in the various Jovian years.

Table 15. Asterisms in which Jupiter rises in the various
Jovian years

ES

 

Jovian year Asterisms in which Jupiter rises

Asvayuk Revati, Asvini, Bharani

Kartika Krttika, Rohini

Margasirsa Mrgasira, Ardra

Pausa Punarvasu, Pusya

Magha ASlesa, Magha

Phalguna Purva Phalguni, Uttara Phalguni, Hasta

Caitra Citra, Svati

Vaisakha Visakha, Anuradha

Jyestha Jyestha, Mula

Asidha Purvasadha, Uttarasadha

Sravana Sravana, Dhanistha

Bhadrapada Satabhisak, Pirva Bhadrapad’a, Uttara Bhadra-
pada

eer emenenenemeese mentee SUERTE OSTEO re ye SSS SSS SSS

The above twelve-year cycle of Jupiter is taken to start at the
beginning of the current yuga with ASvayuk, because in the beginning of
the yuga Jupiter rose heliacally in the asterism ASvini?

There is another cycle of Jupiter which consists of five 12-year

cycles or 60 Jovian years. The sixty years of this cycle bear the
following names : *

1. Cf, Brhat-samhita of Varahamihira, edited with Bhattotpala’s
commentary by S. Dvivedi, Banaras (1895), viii. 2.

 

2. aearantaraheacaraacafaqencafaatefra cafteccaemrasaqoran:

yaaa: |
3. See Jyoti$candrarka by Rudradeva Sharma, N.K. Press,
Lucknow, pp. 27-23; Brhijjyotihsara compiled and translated into

A. Bh, 12


--- Page 164 ---
 

So

wont A wn F&F WN

NY NY NN LW ie) NY NY N YS = pk eek em eta
BRPNepPPRPRRBBRBSeSeRAAARH NHS

30

 

KALAKRIYA SECTION

‘ Vijaya

Jaya
Manmatha
Durmukha
Hemalamba
Vilamba
Vikari
Sarvari
Plava
Subhakrt
Sobhana

* Krodhi

Visvaivasu
Parabhava
Plavanga
Kilaka
Saumya
Sadharana
Virodhakrt
Paridhavi
Pramadi
Ananda
Raksasa
Nala or Anala
Pingala
Kalayukta
Siddhartha
Raudra
Durmati
Dundubhi

31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46

47
48

49
30
31
52
33
34
35
56
37
58
39
60

L Kalakriys Sr.
Rudhirodgari
Raktaksa
Krodhana
Ksaya
Prabhava
Vibhava
Sukla
Pramoda
Prajapati
Angira
Stimukha
Bhava
Yuva
Dhats
Iévara

Bahudhanya
Pramathi
Vikrama
Visa
Citrabhanu
Subhanu
Tarana
Parthiva
Vyaya
Sarvajit
Sarvadhari
Virodbi
Viksta
Khara

Nandana

Hindi by Surya Narayana Siddhanti, T. K. Press, Lucknow, 1972,

pp. 2-3.


--- Page 165 ---
Verse 5-6. ] VARIOUS RECKONINGS OF TIME 91

This cycle took a new round at the beginning of Kaliyuga.
Likewise, the current Kaliyuga started with Vijaya, the first year of
this cycle.

SOLAR YEARS, AND LUNAR, CIVIL AND
SIDEREAL DAYS

gaara Isr, Tage wales qfRrarat: |
efepiie faa, ‘earaatesifs area: |

5. The revolutions of the Sun are solar years. The conjunctions
of the Sun and the Moon are lunar months. The conjunctions
of the Sun and Earth are (civil) days. The rotations of the
Earth are sidereal days.

Thus we have :

Solar years in a yuga == 43,20,000
Lunar months in a yuga=5,34,33,336
Civil days in a yuga = 1,57,79,17,500
Sidereal days in a yuga =1,58,22,37,500

The commentators have adopted the reading “ bhavartascapi
naksatrah” in place of “‘kvavartascapi naksatrah.’ Bhaskara I
(A.D, 629) and Raghunatha-raja (A.D. 1597) have, however, mentioned
the latter as an alternative reading. The latter, evidently, is the correct
reading as it agrees with Aryabhata’s theory of the Earth’s rotation.
The word yoga applied to the Sun and the Earth, as Clark notes, clearly
indicates that Aryabhata I believed in the rotation of the Earth. Also
see infra, ch. iv, vs. 48.

INTERCALARY MONTHS AND OMITTED LUNAR DAYS
afrarast at a earaetishrared FART |
gfafeaan faar yeaararataaaanr tt < Ul

6. The lunar months (in a yuga) which are in excess of the solar
months (in a yuga) are (known as) the intercalary months in a
yuga ; and the lunar days (in a yuga) diminished by the civil
days (in a yuga) are known as the omitted lunar days (in a yuga).

 

er

1, Bh. (quotes), Ra. (quotes) aataaivaifs; others mraareartt


--- Page 166 ---
92 , KALAKRIYA SECTION { Kalakrisa fn,

Thus, according to Aryabhata I,

Intercalary months in yuga=5,34,33,336—5 18 40,000 =15,93,336

Omitted lunar days in a yuga=1] 60,30,C0,080— 1,57,79,17,500
=2,50,82,580

DAYS OF MEN, MaNES. GODS AND OF BRAHMA
vay args, aaa fagaat vata fiery |
fey crenafad fred 79 af feey I 9 1
Rei aed seared ai eecegaT |
Beat aaa aval aay gegarary Ul c

7. <A solar year isa year of men. Thirty times a year of men is
a year of the Manes. Twelve times a year of the Manes is
called a divine year (or a year of the gods).

8. 12000 divine years make a general planetary yuga. 1008 (general)
planetary yugas make a day of Brahma.

The statement that “thirty times a year of menis a year of
the Manes” is inaccurate. The Manes are supposed to reside on the
opposite side of the. Moon. Since the length of a day on the Moon is
equal to one lunar month or 30 lunar days of men, a year of the
Manes is equal to 30 times a lunar year of men, not 30 times a solar
year. The Sarya-siddhanta (xiv 14) makes the statement correctly :
“Of thirty lunar days is composed a lunar month, which is declared to
be a day and night of the Manes.”

What Aryabhata means to say in the above stanza is that
a yuga=43,20,000 years
a day of Brahma (or Kalpa)=1,008 yugas or 4,35,45,60,000 years.

This is in agreement with what he said in A, i. 5. (See p. 9, above)

1. B-E. Gh. Ni. Pa. Su. ayafaseq
2. F. 4m for 9@
3. C. a and F. ym for a7


--- Page 167 ---
Veree 9 ] DIVISIONS OF YUGA 93

UTSARPINI, APASARPINI, SUSAMA AND DUSSAMA
seafial gard aeaesafeatt gay |
HY FRI HIISSTIAA |TAeAATT Ul & Il

9. The (first) half of a yuga is Utsarpini and the second half
Apasarpini. Susama occurs in the middle and Dussama in the
beginning and end. (The time elapsed orto elapse is to be
reckoned) from the position of the Moon’s apogee+

This terminology is in conformity with the teachings of the Jaina
canons. The time-cycle is divided there into two halves: (1) the
auspicious half called Ussarpini and (2) the inauspicious half called
Apasarpini (or Avasarpini). The Utsarpini subdivided
divisions which occur in the following sequence :

is into six

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Dussama-dussama

Dussaméi DUSSAMA (qd)
Dussama-susama
Susama-dussama
Susama

SUSA MA (2)

Susama-susama

The Apasarpini is also similarly subdivided into six divisions which
occur in the following succession :

(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(i)
(12)

Susama-susama

Susama \ SUSAMA (3)
Susama- Dussama
Dussamda-susama@
Dussama@

} @
Dussama-dussama

DUSSAMA

Instead of dividing the Utsarpint and the Apasarpini into six

divisions each, Aryabhata has divided each of them into two gross
divisions, Utsarpini into Dussama@ and Susamé, and Apasarpini into
Susama and Dussama. The two Susama divisions thus fall in the middle
of ayuga and the two Dussama divisions in the beginning and end
of a yuga.

 

—_——

 

1. Same is stated in Vatesvara-siddhanta, Grahaganita, ch. 1,
sec. 2, vs. 6,


--- Page 168 ---
94 KALAKRIYA SECTION { Kalakriys Sn.

The time elapsed is reckoned from the position of the Moon’s
apogee, because in the case of the Moon’s apogee there is no abraded
yuga. The yuga of the Moon’s apogee is the same as the géneral
planetary yuga of 43,20,000 years (or 1,57,79,17,500 days). In the case of
the other planets, there are abraded yugas of smaller durations which are
not to be used. The idea is that in the determination of the elapsed
or unelapsed portion of a yuga the general planetary yuga has to be
taken into account and not the abraded yugas of the planets.

Table 16. Abraded yugas and corresponding revolutions

rer reyes

 

Planet Yuga Revolutions
(in days)
Sun 2,10,389 576
Moon 21,55,625 78,898
Moon’s apogee 1,57,79,17,500 4,88,219
Moon’s ascending node 78,89,58,750 1,16,113
Mars : 13,14,93,125 1,91,402
Sighrocca of Mercury 7,88,95,875 8,96,851
Jupiter 13,14,93,125 30,352
Sighrocca of Venus 13,14,93,125 5,85,199

36,641

Saturn 39,44,79,375
rae

In the Kasyapa-samhita,) a Hindu work on pediatrics, too, time
is classified into two categories, auspicious time (subhakala) and
inauspicious time (asubha-k@la). The auspicious time is called Utsarpini
and the inauspicious time Apasarpini. But, there, the Ursarpini’ is
subdivided into three parts, viz. :

(D) Adi-yuga
(2) Deva-yuga
(3) Krta-yuga
The Apasarpini is also subdivided into three parts, viz. :
(4) Treta-yuga
(5) Dvapara-yuga
(6) Kali-yuga

1. See .Kasyapa-samhita, edited by Hemar3ja Sarma, Nepal
Sanskrit Series, No, 1, Bombay (1938), p. 44,


--- Page 169 ---
Verse 10 }- DATE OF ARYABHATA I 95

Kasyapa has evidently tried to establish an excellent compromise
between the Jaina and the Hindu conceptions,

According to the orthodox Hindu conception, a general planetary
yuga is divided into 4 smaller yugas called Krta, Treta, Dvapara and
Kali. The lengths of these ywgas and the measures of righteousness in
them are supposed to be in the ratio of 4: 3: 2:1. The defect in the
Hindu conception is that Kaliyuga, which is marked by one-quarter of
righteousness, is abruptly followed by Krtayuga, which is marked by
four quarters of righteousness.

The commentators of the Aryabhatiya have taken full liberty in
interpreting the text. The interpretations given by Bhaskara I
(A.D. 629), Stryadeva (b. A.D. 1191) and Nilakantha (A.D. 1500) are
quite arbitrary and different from one another. ,

Two similar terms Avarohini and Arohini are found to occur in
Hindu works on horoscopy. According to Gargi, so long as a planet
moves from its apogee to perigee the Dasa or Antardasa of that
planet is called Avarohini and so long as a planet moves from its perigee
to its apogee, the Dasa or Aatardasa of that planet is called Arohini.
Varahamihira, too, says the same thing. (See Brhajjataka, viii. 6, and
Bhattotpala’s commentary thereon.)

DATE OF AR YABHATA I
qeasatat Vaart SataeTaTs FATT: |
safaar faqiateqreate aa Gena isdtan | go Ul

10. When sixty times sixty years and three quarter yugas (of the
’- current yuga) had elapsed, twentythree years had then passed
since my birth.

This stanza mentions the epoch when 3600 years had elapsed
since the beginning of the current Kaliyuga. Since

1577917500
1200

this epoch corresponds to mean noon at Ujjayini, Sunday, March 21,
499 A.D. Atthis time Aryabhata I was exactly 23 years of age.
Aryabhata I was therefore born on March 21, 476 A.D,

3600 years= or 1314931'25 days,


--- Page 170 ---
96 , KALAKRIYA SECTION [ K&lakriys Sn.

The object of specifying the year 3600 of the Kali era, according
to the commentators of the Aryabhatiya, ‘was to show that at that time
the mean positions of the planets computed from the parameters given
in the Dasagitikd-sutra did not require any correction, and that to the:
mean longitudes computed for a subsequent date a bija correction was
necessary. Such a correction is given by Lalla, who belongs to the

school of Aryabhata I.
Table 17. Bija corrections according to Lalla

(Epoch of zero correction, though really Saka 421, is taken
as Saka 420 for facility of computation)

Planet Bija correcton to the mean longitudes of the
planets per annum in terms of minutes of arc

 

Moon — 25/250
Moon’s apogee — 114/250
Moon’s asc, node — 96/250
Mars + 48/250
Mercury + 420/250 or + 430/250
Jupiter — 47/250
Venus —153/250
Saturn . + 20/250

 

The Kali year 3600 (or Saka year 421) was, according to
Stiryadeva (6. A.D. 1191), Raghunatha-raja (A.D. 1597), ViSvanatha’
(A.D. 1629), and also according to the author of the Vakya-karana

(c. A.D. 1300), the time when the precession of the equinoxes was
also zero.

According to another view, A.D. 522 (corresponding to the Saka
year 444) was the epoch of zero correction to the mean longitudes of the
planets calculated from the parameters stated in the Dasagitika-sutra.

Astronomers holding this view have prescribed the following bija
corrections.

ee

 

1. See his comm. on Makaranda-sarani, Bombay (1935), p. 84.


--- Page 171 ---
Verte 10 J] DATE OF ARYABHATA 97

Table 18. Bija correction according to Haridatta’ and Deva* (689 A.D.)
. (Epoch of zero correction being Saka 444 or A.D. 522)

SP eS SS

Planet Bija correction to the mean longitudes of the planets
per annum in terms of minutes of arc

ee

Moon — 25]235
Moon’s apogee —114/235
Moon’s asc. node -- 96/235
Mars + 45/235
‘Mercury -+-420/235
Jupiter — 47/235
Venus ~—-153]235
Saturn + 20/235

 

Table 19. Another bija® correction with epoch at Saka 444 (A.D. 522)

RS

 

Planet ‘ Bija correction per annum in terms of minutes
of arc
Moon _ 25/235
Moon’s apogee —114]/235
Moon’s asc. node — 96/235
Mars + 50/235
Mercury +430/235
Jupiter — 50/235
Venus — 160/235
Saturn + 21/235

 

 

 

1. See Grahkacara-nibandhana of Haridatta, ed. K.V. Sarma,
p. 25, vss, 17-18.

2. KR, i, 16-18.

3. See Grahacara-nibandhana, pp. 25-26, vss. 19-22, Stiryadeva,
in his comm. on LMa, i. 1-2, calls this correction ‘traditional’
(sampradaya-siddha) ; but for Venus he gives —-180/235 mins. in place
of —160/235 mins.

A. Bh. 13


--- Page 172 ---
98 KALAKERI¥A SECTION [ Kelekriys 8n..

Btrahmadeva :¢A.D. 1092),: who wrote his calendrical work
Karana-prekaia on the basis of Lalla’s Sisya-dhi-vrddhida, Bhoja
(A.D. 1042), who wrote the calendrical work Ra@ja-mrganka, GaneSa
Daivajfia (A.D. 1520), the author of the calendrical work Grahalaghava,
Maiijula (A.D. 932), the author of the Laghu-mdnasa, and some
followers of the Khanda-khadyaka have regarded Saka 444 (A.D. 522)
as the epoch when the precession of the equinoxes was zero.

Some astronomers of Kerala have associated both Saka 421 and
Saka 444 with the life of Aryabhata and have called them Bhatabda (‘the
years associated with Aryabhata’). The Kerala astronomer Haridatta
(c. A.D, 683), the alleged author of the Sakabda correction, has, as
remarked by Nilakantha in his commentary on the Aryabhatiya (rather in
surprise), interpreted the above stanza in a different way, viz. :

“When sixty times sixty years and three quarter yugas had
elapsed, twentythree. years of my age have passed since then.’’

This means that Aryabhata was born in Saka 421 and wrote the
Aryabhatiya in Saka 444. But no commentator of the Aryabhatiya has
interpreted the above stanza in this way, and T.S. Kuppanna Sastri
has rightly called it a ‘wrong interpretation”. Another Kerala
astronomer (probably Jyesthadeva), the author of the Drkkarana
(A.D, 1603), an astronomical manual in Malayalam, has ‘actually stated
that Aryabhata was born in Saka 421 and that he wrote the Aryabhatiya
in Saka 444, This is, according to T.S. Kuppanna Sastri, a “mistaken
impression’,

According to the commentators SOryadeva (6. A.D. 1191)
Paramegvara (A. D. 1431) and Nilakantha (A.D. 1500), the Kali
year 3600 (corresponding to Saka 421), besides being the epoch of zero
correction, indicates the time .of composition of the Aryabhafiya.
K. Sambagiva Sastri, W.E. Clark, and Baladeva Misra, too, hold the
same opinion,

BEGINNING OF THE YUGA, YEAR, MONTH, AND DAY
TAIT: Al TTA” Farysae: |
PASAT eHAday TF il ge ll

ee

1, D. yRew


--- Page 173 ---
Verse 11] BEGINNING OF YUGA ETC. 9

11. The yuga, the year, the month, and the day commenced
simultaneously at the beginning of the light half of Caitra.t
This time, which is without beginning and end, is measured
with the help of the planets and the asterisms on the Celestial
Sphere.

What is meant is that time is endless and has no beginning
or end, but for practical purposes it is measured by means of the
yuga, the year, the month, and the day etc., which are defined on the
basis of the positions of the planets and the asterisms in the sky, in
the same way as length is measured by means of the units of length.

The commentator Bhaskara I provides an alternative inter-
pretation for grahabhair anumiyate. “Others”, writes he, “interpret
grahabhair anumiyate ina different way, viz., the beginning or end of
time is defined with the help of the planets and the asterisms.” The
commentator Somegvara, too, interprets the above stanza in the same
way. Writes he : ‘The puga, the year, the month, and the day started
simultaneously at the beginning of Caitra, ie., at the beginning of
the light fortnight of Caitra when half the Sun had risen (above the
horizon at Lanka), Then it would mean that time has a beginning ;
to contradict this, Aryabhata says : ‘This time is without beginning or
end’, i.e., the time which we have referred to as yuga etc. and whith
started at the beginning of the light half of Caitra, has neither a
beginning nor an end. It is only for the use of the people that its
beginning and end are defined. How are its beginning and end defined
for use ? Aryabhata says : ‘These are defined by (the positions of) the
planets and the asterisms’. As for example, the beginning of the yuga
is defined as the time when all the planets are simultaneously on the
horizon (at Laika) at the first point of Aries:”

Since the calculation of the positions of the planets is ultimately
aimed at the determination of time, the nomenclature ‘the reckoning
of time’ given to the present chapter is highly significant.

 

1, Cf. BrSpSi,i.4; MSi,i.5; SiSe,i.10; SiSi, 1. i. 15.


--- Page 174 ---
100 KALAKRIYA SECTION [ Kalekriys Sn.

EQUALITY OF THE LINEAR MOTION OF THE PLANETS

TET aaisarat water ger aaaTER |
fasta ache ad wart: Hea | 22 Ul

12. The planets moving with equal linear velocity in their own
orbits? complete (a distance equal to) the circumference of the
sphere of the asterisms in a period of 60 solar years, and
(a distance equal to) the circumference of the sphere of the sky
in a yuga?

That is, a planet moves through a distance of 17,32,60,008
yojanas in 60 solar years and a distance of 1,24,74,72,05,76,000 yojanas
in 43,20,000 solar years. Since there are 1,57,79,17,500 days in 43,20,000
solar years, it follows that the mean daily motion of a planet, according
to Aryabhata, is

12474720576000

1577917500 72/4nas

of 7905°8 yojanas approx,

For further details, the reader is referred to our notes on A. i.6
(pp. 13-15, above).

CONSEQUENCE OF EQUAL LINEAR MOTION
OF THE PLANETS

qUEaArIT AeA Hearty Talks Wz! |
safearg adel aera agar TTT UN 23 Ul

13. The Moon completes its lowest and smallest orbit in the

shortest time ; Saturn completes its highest and largest orbit in
the longest time.‘

For the lengths of the orbits of the planets, see supra, i. 6
(p. 13, above).

 

C. afer

Cf. PSi, xiii. 39 (c-d).

Cf. BrSpSi, xxi. 12,

Cf. PSi, xiii. 41; SoSi, xii. 76-77 ; Si§i, I, i. 5. 27 (c-d).

ee


--- Page 175 ---
Verse 14} CIRCULAR DIVISIONS 101

NON-EQUALITY OF THE LINEAR MEASURES OF THE
CIRCULAR DIVISIONS

ary fe queaseq qeft qeaTA TTA FIT |
SI Hees aMaran wHTATs Ul 22 Il

14. (The linear measures of) the sigus are to be known to be small
in small orbits and large in large orbits ;* so also are (the linear
measures of) the degrees, minutes, etc. The circular division is
however, the same in the orbits of the various planets.

The first part of the above statement would be self-evident from
the following table which gives the Jengths in yojanas of one sign, one
degree and one minute in the orbits of the various planets. The planets
have been arranged, for the sake of convenience, in the order of
increasing orbits.

Table 20. Lengths in yojanas of the circular divisions of the orbits

 

 

Lengths in yojanas of

 

Orbit of
1 sign 1 degree 1 minute

Moon 18000 600 10
Sighrocca of

Mercury 57956 1932 32
Sighrocca of

Venus 148035 4935 82
Sun 240639 8021 134
Mars 452608 15087 251
Jupiter 2854178 95139 1586
Saturn 7092874 236429 3940

 

1. CE. Su, afa ; C. SU. add @ here,
2. Cf. PSi, xiii. 40; SaSi, xii. 75 (c-d); SiSi, I, i. 5. 27 (6).


--- Page 176 ---
102 KALAKRIYA SECTION [ Kalakriya Sa.

The second part of the statement means that in the orbits of
all the planets one sign is equal to 1/12 of the orbit, one degree is
equal to 1/30 of a sign, one minute is equal to 1/60 of a degree, and
80 On, :

The non-equality of the linear measures of the circular divisions
in the orbits of the various planets implies that although the planets
have equal linear velocity, their angular velocities are different. The
following table gives the mean angular velocities of the planets according
to Aryabhata I

Table 21. Mean angular velocities of the planets

 

Planet Mean angular velocity per day

Sun 59’ 8”

Moon 790° 35”

Moon’s apogee 6’ 41"

Moon’s ascending node 3’ 11"

Mars 31’ 26"

Sighrocca of Mercury "4p 5! 32"

Jupiter ; 4’ 59" or 5’ 00" approx.
Sighrocca of Venus 1° 36°. 8"

Saturn 2’ 0”

 

RELATIVE POSITIONS OF ASTERISMS AND PLANETS
MATT TALRGTATATAT TIAL |
aqTTTTTT feat BASIAT Mey Ul

15. (The asterisms are the outermost). Beneath the asterisms lie
(the planets) Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury,

 

1. See SiDVr, I, i. 40-41.
2. All others than Bh., a9f for qj


--- Page 177 ---
Verse 6 4 LORDS: OF HOURS AND DAYS 103

and the Moon (one below the other) ; and beneath them all lies
the Earth like the hitching peg in the midst of space.’

LORDS OF THE HOURS AND DAYS
aaa AIT: VAVATTT TATA TAT |
giamasagal aaiea ature’ farm: Ul 8g UI

16. The (above-mentioned) seven planets beginning with Saturn,
which are arranged in the order of increasing velocity, are the
lords of the successive hours. The planets occurring fourth in
the order of increasing velocity are the lords of the successive
days, which are reckoned from sunrise (at Laaka).*

That is to say, the lords of the twenty-four hours (the hours being
reckoned from sunrise at Lanka) are :

Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon, Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter,
Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars,
respectively ;

and the lords of the seven days are :

Saturn, Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, and Venus,
respectively.

The lord of a day is the lord of the first hour of that day, the
day being measured from sunrise at Lanka.

It is to be noted that the lords of the hours and the days are
to be reckoned from sunrise at Laika (and not from sunrise at the local
place). Since Aryabhata I mentions, in the above rule, sunrise without

specifying that it refers to Lanka, Brahmagupta finds occasion to
criticise him,

1, Cf, PSt, xiii, 39; BrSpSi, xxi. 2; SiSe, xv. 70; SiSi, I
iii, 2.
2. D. qater
3. Of. PSi, xiii. 425 SuSi, xii, 78-79.


--- Page 178 ---
104 . KALAKRIYA SECTION’ { Kelakriys Sa.
Writes he :

“The statement of Aryabhata, viz., ‘Reckoned from sunrise,
the planets occurring fourth (in the order of increasing
velocity) are the lords of the successive days’ is not true,
because he has himself declared sunset at Siddhapura when it
is sunrise at Lanka,’”

On this criticism, Brahmagupta’s commentator PrthUdaka
comments : :

“This is a phantom of a defect, for, in the Datagitika,
Aryabhata has (already) said—‘from sunrise at Lanka’.”

As regards the first day of the week cycle, it is perhaps implied
in the above rule that it was Saturday. Vatesvara (A.D. 904) is the only
Hindu mathematician who supposed that the world-order commenced
on Saturday. He has criticised Brahmagupta for starting the Kalpa
on Sunday :

N

“The lords of the hours, days, months and years have been stated
by Brahma to succeed one another in the order of increasing
velocity beginning with Saturn and not with the Sun, Even
the order of the planets are not known to him,’*

MOTION OF THE PLANETS. EXPLAINED THROUGH
ECCENTRIC CIRCLES

HRUTAATSAM AAfed VA TAs TAT |
weaeataded aaa Ba gtaeaTG Mt go

1. qateqreagat fara agaa acaerdae: |
wes aassearerat =e faaqe vu
(BrSpSt, - xi. 12)
2. eftsrnarfereaar staferaraadat ara i
weaaiatafe 7 at aeeaterafa
VaSi, Grahaganita, ch. 1, sec. 10, vs. 9


--- Page 179 ---
Verses 17-20 ] MOTION OF PLANETS 105

Reread TH  ataaed HAITI
gfuceaer wed TayAeatafaereag Ul ec Ml
qraausayiaad STATS BET TTTC |

17. (The mean plasets move on their orbits and the true planets on
their eccentric circles). All the planets, whether moving on
their orbits (kaksya-mandala) or on the eccentric circles
(prati-mandala), move with their own (mean) motion, anticlock-
wise from their apogees and clockwise from their ‘ighroccas.

18. The eccentric circle of each of these planets is equal to its own
orbit, but the centre of the eccentric circle lies at a distance
from the centre of the solid Earth.

49. {a-b) The distance between the centre of the Earth and the centre
of the eccentric circle is (equal to) the semi-diameter of the
epicycle (of the planet).

MOTION OF PLANETS EXPLAINED
THROUGH EPICYCLES

gaat TERa ASTAANTT’ WAAT Ul ge Ul
a: ant: ea wratertia: TTR STAT |
aramranfaae aeqniiat wal AAT UI Re

19. (c-d) All the planets undoubtedly move with. mean motion on the
circumference of the epicycles.

20. Aplanet when faster than its ucca moves clockwise on the
circumference of its epicycle and when slower than its ucca
moves anticlockwise on its epicycle.‘

 

 

1. B.D. E. Bh. Gh. So, SU. TeIAaTTe ; others HeqaTe
2. Bh. wardtay
3, B-E, Gh. Ni, Pa, So. safer

4. Cf, BrSpSi, xxi. 25-26; SiDVr, U. i. 12 (ab); Si$e, xvi. 5;
SiSi, UL, v. 30.

A, Bh. 14


--- Page 180 ---
106 KALAKRIYA SECTION { Kalakriya Sn.

What is meant is that a planet moves clockwise on its manda
epicycle and anticlockwise on its Sighra epicycle,

According to the commentator Bhaskara I, verse 20 relates to
the determination of the true daily motion, retrograde or direct. He
has interpreted this verse as follows :

“When the sighragatiphala (Sighra-motion-correction) is negative
but numerically greater than the true-mean motion, _ their
difference gives the retrograde motion 3; and when Sighragati-
Phala (Sighra-motion-correction) is negative but numerically
less than the true-mean motion, their difference gives the
direct motion, This latter motion when less than mean motion
is called slow motion (mandagati).”

Following Bhaskara I, the commentator Somegvara, too, interprets
the verse in the same way. ,

Evidently, both Bhaskara I and SomeSvara have misunderstood
the text.

MOTION OF EPICYCLES

Baas Fara Mtg area Ta
PUITAUTAVATTAAEY FEY ALT! 11 2e II

21. The epicycles move anticlockwise from the apogees and clock-
wise from the sighroccas. The mean planet lies at the centre
of its epicycle, which is situated on the (planet’s) orbit.

What is meant is that the manda epicycles move anticlockwise
from the apogees and the gighra epicycles move clockwise from the
Sighroccas.

ADDITION AND SUBTRACTION OF MANDAPHALA
AND SIGHRAPHALA

TTT TSU Gray sae esa |

1. EJF, Ni. Pa. aoraa
2. aealeqi@ata var. recorded by Bh. (in his com. on this verse)


--- Page 181 ---
Verse 22 ] APPLICATION OF CORRECTIONS 107

22. (a-b) The corrections from the apogee (for the four anomalistic
quadrants) are respectively minus, plus, plus, and minus.
‘Those from the fighrocca are just the Teverse.

In the time of Aryabhata I, the Rsines of the arcs (p> 90°) were
obtained by the application of the following formulae :
Rsin (90°-++ 6)=Rsin 90°—Rvers 6
Rsin (180°-+-6)=Rsin 90°—Rvers 90°— Rsin @

Resin (270°-+6)=Rsin 90°—Rvers 90°—Rsin 90°-++Rvers 9,
where 6<90°.

Suppose that a planet lies in the fourth manda anomalistic
quadrant and that the manda anomaly is 270°-++-6. Then

Rsin (270°-+-6)=Rsin 90°—Rvers 90°—Rsin 90°-+-Rvers 4,
so that

Rsin (90°—6)==—-Rsin 90° + Rvers 90°-+ Rsin 90°—Rvers 8,
or .
Mandakendrabhujajya==—Rsin 90° + Rvers 90°-++ Rsin 90°

—Rvers 9 .....- (1)

Now, multiplying both sides of (1) by the planet’s manda
epicycle and dividing by 360, we get 7

Correction from the apogee (mandaphala)

= —correction for the first quadrant-+-correction for the second
quadrant+correction for the third quadrant—correction for the
fourth quadrant,

whence it is clear that the corrections for the first, second, third, and
fourth quadrants are —, +, +, and —, respectively. ,

The same can be seen to be true when the planet isin the other
anomalistic quadrants.

In the case of the sighraphala, the correction for the four
quadrants are of the contrary signs, because the mandakendra and the
Sighrakendra are defined contrarily :

~—_—_
1. Cf. BrSpSi, ii. 16 (a-b).

 


--- Page 182 ---
108 KALAKRIYA SECTION

- mandakendra =

{ Kalakriys Sx.
longitude of planet—longitude of planet's
apogee.

Sighrakendra=longitude of planet’s

Sighrocca—longitude
of planet.

The law of addition and subtraction of the mandaphala and
Sighraphala in the four quadrants is mentioned also by Bhaskara I,
(A.D. 629), Brahmagupta (A.D. 628) and Sripati (ce, A.D. 1039), but

it was more convenient to apply the mandaphala as obtained by the
formula :

mandaphala= Rsin 8X manda epicycle
360 .
(@ being the planet’s mandakendra reduced to bhuja)

negatively or positively, according as the mandakendra was less than or

greater than 180°, and the Sigh-a-phala as obtained by the formula

Sighrapha la Rsin 6 “ehra epicycle x i
(8 being the planet’s Sighrakendra reduced to bh

uja and H the
planet’s s;ghrakarna)

Positively or negatively, according as the Sighrakendra was less than or

greater than 180°. And so the Hindu astronomers ha
adopted these latter rules.

ve generally
A SPECIAL PRE-CORRECTION FOR THE
SUPERIOR PLANETS

TATESAT Hea at aT Fu ee tI

22. (c-d) In the case of (the superior planets) Saturn, Jupiter and
Mars, first apply the mandaphala negatively or positively (as
the case may be).

Here the following rule is implied :

In the case of Saturn, Jupiter and Mars, first apply half the
mandaphala to the mean longitude of the planet negatively

or positively, according as the mandakendra is less than or
greater than 180°.

te ee,

1. Weasaor a waft qaq, var. recorded by Bhaskara I in his
comm.


--- Page 183 ---
Verse 23 ) ALTERNATIVE METHOD 109

This pre-correction is meant only for the superior planets—Mars,

Jupiter and Saturn, It should not be applied to the inferior planets,
Mercury and Venus. (See full rules given below),

23.

PROCEDURE OF MANDAPHALA AND SIGHRAPHALA
CORRECTIONS FOR SUPERIOR PLANETS

qr aHaUTIAT Ta TT aes |
WANT HALT: AM TTEA VHAt Fats Il 2 Il

Apply half the mandaphala and half the fighraphala to the planet
and to the planet’s apogee negatively or positively (as the case
may be). The mean planet (then) corrected for the mandaphala
(calculated afresh from the new mandakendra) is called the
true-mean planet and that (true-mean planet) corrected for the

Sighraphala (calculated afresh) is known as the true planet.t

~~

This rule may be stated fully as follows :

Apply half the mandaphala to the mean longitude of the planet
negatively or positively, according as the mandakendra is less
than or greater than 180° and to the longitude of the planet’s
apogee reversely. Then apply half the Sigkraphala to the
corrected longitude of the planet's apogee negatively or
positively, according as the Sighrakendra is less than or greater
than 180°.

Then calculate the mandaphala afresh and apply the whole of
it to the (original) mean longitude of the planet negatively or
positively, according as the mandakendra is less than or greater
than 180°: this would give the true-mean longitude of the
planet, Then calculate the sighraphala again and apply the
whole of it to the true-mean longitude of the planet positively
or negatively, according as the Sighrakendra is less than or
greater than 180°: this would give the true longitude of the
planet.

—

1,

Cf. MBh, iv. 40-43 ; LBh, ii. 33-37 (a-b) ; SiDV7, I, iii. 4-7.


--- Page 184 ---
110 KALAKRIYA SECTION [ Kalakriya Sn,

MANDAPHALA AND SIGHRAPHALA CORRECTIONS
FOR INFERIOR PLANETS

ghee ads at easy |
THEM | YTTA fagrneaiq eel waa | 29 ll

24. (In the case of Mercury and Venus) apply half the sighraphala
negatively or positively to the longitude of the planet’s apogee
(according as the sighrakendra is less than or greater than 180°).
From the corrected longitude of the planet’s apogee (calculate
the mandaphala afresh and apply it to the mean longitude of
the planet ; then) are obtained the true-mean longitudes of

‘Mercury and Venus. (The sighraphala, calculated afresh, being
applied to them), they become true (longitudes).

The old Sarya-siddhanta applied the mandaphala and Sighraphala
corrections in the following order :

(a) For obtaining the true longitude of the planet’s apogee :

1. Half sighraphala to the longitude of the planet's apogee
(reversely).

2. Half mandaphala to the corrected longitude of the planet’s
apogee (reversely).
(b) For obtaining the true longitude of the planet :

3. Entire mandaphala (calculated from the corrected
longitude of the planet’s apogee) to the mean longitude
of the planet.

4, Entire Sighraphala to the corrected mean longitude
(called true-mean longitude) of the planet.

But instead of applying a pre-correction in the case of the superior
planets (as done by Aryabhata), it prescribed an impirical correction
(called the fifth correction) in the case of the inferior planets.*

1. A. grat
2. Cf. MBh, iv. 44; LBh, ii. 37(c-d)-39; SiDVy, I, iii. 8.

3. See PSf, xvi. 17-22. Also see K,S, Shukla, The Pafica-
siddhantika of Varahamihira (1), HS, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 69-71. -


--- Page 185 ---
Verse 25 ] DISTANCE AND VELOCITY lu

It seems that the procedure used by the author of the old Surya-
siddhanta did not lead to accurate results and that Aryabhata’s method
was an improvement,

DISTANCE AND VELOCITY OF A PLANET

ara Caraga RTT |
meatal we a wate a wea Ry UI

[ xfa wrefeaiqa: aartca: 1° J

25. The product of the mandakarna and the sighrakarna when divided
by the radius gives the distance between the Earth and the
planet.®

The velocity of the (true) planet moving on the (sighra) epicycle
is the same as the velocity of the (true-mean) planet moving in
its orbit (of radius equal to the mandakarna).

Aryabhata and his followers take the distance between the Earth
and a planet as equal to
mandakarna x Sighrakarna
R ’
the mandakarna and the Sighrakarna being obviously the karres obtained

in the last two operations.

The Sarya-siddhanta’ takes the distance between the Earth and a
planet as equal to

mandakarna-t Sighrakarna
2 °

————

1, DELP, amartgd

2. A. sf stafwaare: ; (E. om. eff) ; F. afer srefeat ara:
™! 3.‘ The same rule occurs in MBh, vi. 48; LBh, vii, 8.

4. SnSi, vii. 14.


--- Page 186 ---
112 KALAKRIYA SECTION { K&lakriy& Sn,

Aryabhata takes the orbit of the true-mean planet as equal to the
mandakarna. Hence the rule in the second half of the stanza.

The commentator Stryadeva interprets the second half of the
verse as meaning :

“The velocity of the (true) planet in the (Sighra) epicycle is the
same asthe velocity of the planet in the orbit constructed
with radius equal to the distance of the planet from the
Earth.”’

What he means to say is that the velocity of the (true) planet moving on
the (Sighra) epicycle is equal to the true-mean velocity.


--- Page 187 ---
CHAPTER 1V
GOLA OR THE CELESTIAL SPHERE

[ In order to demonstrate the motion of the heavenly
bodies, the Hindu astronomers make use of spheres constructed
by means of circles made of flexible wooden sticks or bamboo
strips. These are called Gola and correspond to the Celestial
Sphere of modern astronomy. The Gola which is supposed to be
centred at the Earth’s centre is called Bhagola (‘Sphere of the
asterisms’). It is used to demonstrate the motion of the Sun, the
Moon and the planets in their orbits. The principal circles of
this sphere are: (1) the celestial equator, (2) the ecliptic, (3) the
orbits of the Moon and the planets, and (4) the day-circles, etc.
The Gola which is supposed to be centred at the observer is called
Khagola (‘Sphere of the sky’). It is fixed in position and is used
to demonstrate the diurnal motion of the heavenly bodies ; the
principal circles of this sphere are: (1) the horizon, (2) the
meridian, (3) the prime vertical, and (4) the six o’clock circle, etc,
In the present Section, Aryabhata aims at teaching spherical
astronomy. He begins by giving a brief description of the
Bhagola and the Khagola and then, with their help, demonstrates
the motion of the heavenly bodies. ]

1. Bhagola
POSITION OF THE ECLIPTIC

Ang: Bead TABMIATEATIATTT |
Heras stated Teed sfrass ue

1. One half of the ecliptic, ronning from the beginning of the
sign Aries to the end of the sign Virgo, lies obliquely inclined
(to the equator) northwards. The remaining half (of the
ecliptic) running from the beginning of the sign Libra to the
end of the sign Pisces, lies (equally inclined to the equator)
southwards.?

—_———__

 

1. D, waTa: :
2. Cf, BrSpSi, xxi. 52 SiDVy, Ul, ii. 7; VSi, Gola, iv. 7;
i SiS$e, xvi.32; SiSi, I, vi.12; SuSi, II, iv. 6 (a-b).

A. Bh, 15 113


--- Page 188 ---
114 GOLA SECTION { Gola Sn.

Reference to the equator without defining it shows that its

position was supposed to be well known and that it was already shown
on the Bhagola.

The word eva, says the commentator Bhaskara I, is superfluous
and is meant to complete the arya verse. In case the alternative
reading evam is adopted, the word ‘similarly’ will have to be added
in the beginning of the second sentence (in the translation above).

Bhaskara I thinks that the word sama is intended to suggest
that the signs of the ecliptic are of equal measure, i.e., each of 30°.

MOTION OF THE NODES, THE SUN AND
THE EARTH’S SHADOW

ATAETIA AAATTATATS ASAT
wae aveard wala fe aftay fafaearat leu

2. The nodes of the star-planets (Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus .
and Saturn) and of the Moon incessently move on the ecliptic.
So also does the Sun. From the Sun, ata distance of half a
circle, moves thereon the Shadow of the Earth.2

The nodes of a planet are the two points where the orbit of
the planet intersects the ecliptic. The point where the planet crosses
the ecliptic in its northerly course in called the ‘ascending node’ and the

point where the planet crosses the ecliptic in its southerly course is
called the ‘descending node’.

MOTION OF THE MOON AND THE PLANETS

ATALSAL WH! TANT Tegaty afaqa: |
gaye Raat Tae Aarts Tawar Uz

3. The Moon moves to the north and to the south of the ecliptic
(respectively) from its (ascending and descending) nodes. So

 

1. B, waiq a (wr.)

2. Cf. BrSpSi, xxi. 53; SiDVr, Ul, ii. 8; VSi, Gola, iv. 8 ;
SiSe, xvi. 33 ; SiSi, UL, vi. 11.

3. BCE Pa. gaR7


--- Page 189 ---
Verse 3 ] MOTION OF MOON AND PLANETS 415

also do the planets Mars, Jupiter and Saturn. Similar is also the
_ motion of the sighroccas of Mercury and Venus.!

With regard to the last statement, Pythtdaka (A. D. 860)
says: “As much is the (celestial) latitude of Mercury or Venus at
its sighrocca, so much is its (celestial) latitude at the place occupied
by it.” ‘

This is so, writes Bhaskara II (A.D. 1150), because the
revolution-number of the node (in the case of Mercury and Venus) is
the sum of the revolution-numbers of the planet’s nede and the planet’s
fighra anomaly (i.e., sighrocca minus planet.).®

The correct explanation, however, is that Mercury and Venus
revolve round the Sun with the velocity of their Sighroccas and so
the (celestial) latitudes of Mercury and Venus are really the latitudes
of their sighroccas.

The following rules are implied in the instructions of the text :
1. In the case of the Moon

Rsin (M—®) x Rsin é
ns : —~ e
where M and Qare the true longitudes of the Moon and its ascending
node, i the inclination of the Moon’s orbit to the ecliptic, and H the
Moon’s true distance (called mendakarna).*

Rsin (latitude) =

2. In the case of Mars, Jupiter and Saturn
Rsin (P—Q) x Rsin i
D >
where P and Q are the true longitudes of the planet and its ascending
node, i the inclination of the planet’s orbit to the ecliptic, and D
the distance of the planet from the Earth (as defined in Kalakriya, 25).°

3. In the case of Mercury and Venus

Rsin (S—Q)xRsin i
——HOC~CS ~)

where S and Qare longitudes of the planet’s sighrocca and ascending

Rsin (latitude) =

Rsin (latitude) = —

 

 

 

1. Cf. BrSpSi, xxi. 54; SiDVr, U, ii-9 ; VSi, Gola, iv. 9;
SiSe, xvi, 34-35; SiSi, I, vi. 14.
2,3. See SiSi, Il, Golabandha, 23-25 (a-b) ; and Bhaskara
II’s comm. on it.
bes 4. Cf. LBh, iv. 8.
: 5. Cf. MBh, vi. 52-53; LBh, vii. 6-9 (a-b),


--- Page 190 ---
116 GOLA SECTION [ Gola Sn,

node, i the inclination of the planet’s orbit to the ecliptic, and D the
distance of the planet from the Earth (as defined in Kalakriya, 25).2

These formulae are not accurate but, according to Bhaskara I,
they conform to the teachings of Aryabhata I.

The correct formula for the celestial latitude of a planet is :
Rsin (latitude) Asn Orc Rein <Rsini
where II is the heliocentric longitude of the planet?

VISIBILITY OF THE PLANETS

walsdaleatiereeatsetackeray cea: |
TAR gaeszahazaaTa: Ue
4. When the Moon has no latitude it is visible when situated at a
distance of 12 degrees (of time) from the Sun. Venus is visible
when 9 degrees (of time) distant from the Sun. The other

Planets taken in the order of decreasing sizes (viz., Jupiter,

Mercury, Saturn, and Mars)> are yisible when they are

9 degrees (of time) increased by two-s (i.e, when they are 11,

13, 15 and 17 degrees of time) distant from the Sun.

One degree of time is equivalent to 4 minutes. Thus the Moon,
when ahead of the Sun, is visible towards the west if the arc of the ecliptic
joining the Sun and the Moon, takes at least 12x4 minutes in setting
below the horizon ;- and when behind the Sun, it is visible towards the
east if the arc of the ecliptic joining the Sun and the Moon takes at
least 124 minutes in rising above the horizon. In other words, the
Moon will be visible at a place if the time-interval between sunrise and
moonrise, or between sunset and moonset, amounts to 12x4 minutes
or more. But this is the case when the Moon has no latitude.

“‘When, however, the Moon has some latitude,”” comments
Bhiskara I, “‘it is visible earlier or later than when itis two ghatikas

 

 

1. Cf MBh, vi. 52-53 ; LBA, vii. 6-9 (a-b).
2, See BrSpSi, ix. 9; SiDVr, I, xi. 6, 9 ete.
3. All except Bh. and So., feadzaz:

4. D. agra dea

5. See supra, i. 7.

6. Cf. PSi, xvi, 23; MBh, vi, 4 (¢-d)-5 (a-b), 44-45; 44;
LBh, vi. 5, vii. 1.


--- Page 191 ---
mt

Verse 5 J BRIGHT AND DARK SIDES OF PLANETS -va7

(i.e., 12 degrees of time) distant from the Sun. For, when it has north
latitude, the (Moon’s) sphere being elevated towards the north, it is
visible earlier than when it is two ghatikas distant from the Sun; and
when it has south latitude, the (Moon’s) sphere being depressed towards
the south, it is visible later than when it is two ghatikas distant from the
Sun. That is why it is said— ‘When the Moon has no latitude’. There-
fore, the distance of the planet from the Sun sbould be taken after the
visibility correction has been applied to the longitude of the planet.”
The degrees of time for the heliacal visibility of the planets
as given by the old Surya-siddhanta,) are the same as those given
above. Those given by the Vasistha-siddhanta summarised by
Varahamihira are: 12° for the Moon, 14° for Mars, 12° for Mercury,
15° for Jupiter, 8° for Venus and 15° for Saturn.?

According to the Greek astronomer Ptolemy (c. A. D. 100-178)
the distances of the planets, when in the beginning of the sign Cancer
(i. e., when the equator and ecliptic are nearly parallel), from the true
Sun, at which they become heliacally visible, are : for Saturn, 14°; for
Jupiter 12° 45’; for Mars, 14° 30’; and for Venus and Mercury, in the
west, 5° 40’ and 11° 30’, respectively. See The Almagest, xiii. 7.

BRIGHT AND DARK SIDES OF THE EARTH
AND THE PLANETS

qaenal transite eearaat airs |
aaifa aaa aaltagaria gieaed ity il

5. Halves of the globes of the Earth, the planets and the stars are
dark due to their own shadows ; the other halves facing the Sun
are bright in proportion to their sizes $

The Hindu astronomers believed that the Sun was the only
source of light in the universe and all other celestial bodies, which were
spherical in shape, received their light from the Sun. Their conception
that the stars too received light from the Sun and were half-luminous
and half-dark is indeed wrong.

The next eight stanzas give a description of the Earth which
occupies the centre of the Bhagola.

 

 

1, See PSi, xvi. 23.
2, See PSi, xvii. 58.
3. Of. PSi, xiii, 35; SiDVe, IM, iii. 40; SiSe, xviii. 14.


--- Page 192 ---
118 GOLA SECTION : { Gola Sa,

SITUATION OF THE EARTH, ITS CONSTITUTION
AND SHAPE

TTATHTASY BAIIAfea: Aaa |
¢
asaaeargan yaa: aaa Ta Ug
6. The globe of the Earth stands (supportless) in space at the

centre of the circular frame of the asterisms (i.¢., at the centre
of the Bhagola) surrounded by the orbits (of the planets); it is
made up of water, earth, fire and air and is spherical ((it.
circular on all sides).!

The commentator Some$vara’s statement that “‘the Earth, mother
of all beings, stands ‘motionless’ in space” is against the teachings of
Aryabhata.

It is remarkable that Aryabhata, unlike the other astronomers,
takes the Earth as made up of four: elements, yiz., earth, water, fire

and air, only. The other astronomers take it as made up of five
elements, viz., earth, water, fire, air and ether.

EARTH COMPARED WITH THE KADAMBA FLOWER
a
aaq Raragsagieg: ohaa: aArIa: FAA: |
¢ ao oA a
Fals AAMT! TAIT FAA! | 9 I
7. Just as the bulb of a Kadamba flower is covered all around by

blossoms, just so is the globe of the Earth surrounded by all
creatures, terrestrial as well as aquatic.?

INCREASE AND DECREASE IN THE SIZE
OF THRE EARTH

aalgata yaerktery ata wate ate: |
ager‘ Secon agafrarareafee’ arf: tc

8.. During a day of Brahma, the size of the Earth increases
externally by one yojana; and during a night of Brahma, which
is as long as a day, this growth of the earth is.destroyed.’

 

1. Cf. PSi, xiii. 1;  BrSpSi, xxi.2; SiDVr, U, iv. 1;
SiSe, xv, 22-23 ; SiSi, Il, iii. 2 (a-b) ; Golasara, ii, 1. :

2. Cf. PSi, xiii. 2; SiDVr, U, iv. 6.

3. A. E. Gh. Ni. Pa. watfeaaa 4, B.D.E, ae

5. EF. Ni. Pa. aa 6. So, wafa for afaz

7. The same statement occurs in SiDVr, I, v.20; SiSi,
U, iii. 62,


--- Page 193 ---
Verses 9-10 ] APPARENT MOTION OF THE STARS 7419

Modern astronomers, too, believe in the growth of the Earth’s
size, but this growth, according to them is extremely insignificant.
C. A. Young, in his Text Book on Astronomy, writes : “Since the
earth is continually receiving meteoric matter, and sending nothing
away from it, it must be constantly growing larger: but this growth is
extremely insignificant ........ It would take about 1000000000 years to
accumulate a layer one inch thick over the earth’s surface.”

According to modern geologists, the rate of uplift of the earth
varies from place to place and time to time. The minimum rate of
uplift of the Himalayas is about 6 in. per century,! whereas the present
rate of uplift of the earth in Greenland is 3 mm. per year.*

APPARENT MOTION OF THE STARS DUE TO
THE EARTH’S ROTATION

aamaaater: waetad featet 7x7 |
saat aie dag aarieaamiy agray ll &

seareanatataa fed sata argat faca: |
wsaaaat AAG at wala Ul ge Il

9. Justasamanin a boat moving forward sees the stationary
objects (on either side of the river) as moving backward, just
so are the stationary stars seen by people at Laika (on the
equator), as moving exactly towards the west.

10. (It so appears as if) the entire structure of the asterisms
together with the planets were moving exactly towards the
west of Lanka, being constantly driven by the provector wind,
to cause their rising and setting.

The theory of the Earth’s rotation underlying the above passage
was against the view generally beld by the people and was severely
criticised by Varahamihira (d. A-D. 587) and Brahmagupta. (628 A.D.)
The followers of Aryabhata I, who were unable to refute the criticism
against the theory, fell in line with Varahamihira and others of his
ilk and have misinterpreted the above verses as conveying the contrary

 

 

1. See D.N. Wadia, Geology of India, Macmillan and
Company, London, 1949, p. 300 fn.

2. See Richard Foster Flint, Glacial and Pleistocene Geology,
John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1963, p. 256.


--- Page 194 ---
120

GOLA SECTION t Gola Sn.

sense. See how the commentator Somegvara interprets the above

VeTSes :

!

“Just as one seated on a boat sees the stationary objects
such as trees etc. standing on the two sides of the river or
sea moving in the contrary direction, in the same way those
situated on the Earth rotating eastwards see the stationary
stars located in the sky as moving inthe opposite direction
towards the west. Likewise, those living in Lanka see the
stars as moving towards the west. Lanka is only a token,
others also see in the same way. So, it isthe Earth that
moves towards the east; the stars are fixed. And that part
of the circle of the asterisms which lies (at the moment)
towards the east appears to rise, that which lies in the middle
of the sky appears to culminate, and that which lies towards
the west appears to set. Otherwise, the rising and setting of
the stars is impossible.”” After saying all this he adds :

“This is the false view. For, ifthe Earth had a motion, the
world would have been inundated by the oceans, the tops of
the trees and castles would have disappeared, having been
blown away by the storm caused by the velocity of the Earth,
and the birds etc. flying in the sky would never have returned
to their nests. So, there exists not a single trace of the Earth’s
motion. Hence this stanza must be interpreted in another
way (as follows) :

“Just as aman seated on a boat moving forward sees the
stationary objects moving in the contrary direction, in the
same way the asterisms driven by the provector wind, due to
their own motion, see the objects at Lanka as moving in the
opposite direction, i.¢., they see the stationary Earth lying
below as if it were rotating. Apparently also the asterisms
rise in the east and move towards the west.”

Prthtidaka (860 A.D.) in his commentary on the Brahma-sphuta-
siddhanta, supports Aryabhata I’s theory of the Earth’s rotation. The
followers of Aryabhata I, who misinterpreted Aryabhata I, were,
according to him, afraid of the public opinion which was against the
motion of the Earth.

It is noteworthy that the Greek astronomor Ptolemy (¢. A. D.
100-178) holds that the Earth is stationary and does not move in
any way locally.1

 

1,

 

See The Almages?, translated by R.C. Taliaferro, pp. 10-12.


--- Page 195 ---
Verse 11] THE MERU MOUNTAIN yi

DESCRIPTION OF THE MERU MOUNTAIN

Heatsaara: TavEt fara Thaea: |
ct
ARTATATT HEY TANT! TAT Ta Ul ge il

11. The Mera (mountain) is exactly one yojana (in height). It is
light-producing, surrounded by the Himavat mountain, situated
in the middle of the Nandana forest, made of jewels, and cylin.
drical in shape.

The height of the Meru mountain taught here is quite different
from the teachings of the Puranas. It is also different from the teachings
of the Buddhists and the Jainas.

According to the Puranas, the Meru mountain is 84,000 yojanas
high, of which 16,000 yojanas lie inside the Earth.? According to the
Buddhists, it is 1,60,000 yojanas high, of which 80,000 yojanas lie sub- .
merged in water and 80,000 yojanas above the Earth.? According to the
Jainas, it is 1,00,000 yojanas high, of which 1000 yojanas lie inside the
Earth and 99,000 yojanas outside the Earth.‘

The commentator Nilakantha thinks that the above stanza is
meant to refute the enormous size of the Meru advocated in the Puranas
and elsewhere. The commentators Bhaskara I, SomeSvara and
Raghunatharaja, however, reconcile the two views by interpreting the
word Meru as meaning ‘“‘the highest peak of the Meru mountain’’.

It seems that, according to the instruction of verse 8 above,
the maximum uplift of the earth cannot exceed one yojana and so
the height of any mountain cannot be greater than one yojana. This
is perhaps the reason that Aryabhata takes the height of the Meru
mountain as one yojana only and not more.

Combining the instructions given in A, i. 7 with those given
above, we see that, according to Aryabhata I, the Meru mountain
is cylindrical in shape, with its diameter and height each equal to.
one yojana.

 

1 DE ae
2. See bayu-purana, ch. 34, gatha 1-45; ch. 35, gatha 11-32;
Visnupurana, Ama 2, ch. 2, gatha 5-19; Markandeya-purdpa, ch. 54,
gatha 5-19 ; Matsya-purana, ch, 113, gatha 4-40.
& See Abhidharmakosa of Vasubandhu,.
4. See Lokaprakdasa, 18.15-16,

A, Bh, 16


--- Page 196 ---
122 GOLA SECTION 1 Gola Sn.

In calling the Meru mountain as ‘light-producing’ Aryabhata I
probably has in mind the ‘northern lights’ or the ‘aurora’, which Robert
H. Baker describes in the following words :

“Characteristic of many displays of the ‘northern lights’ of our
atmosphere is a luminous arch across the northern sky, having
its apex in the direction of the geomagnetic pole. Rays like
searchlight beams reach upward from the arch, while bright
draperies may spread to other parts of the sky, altogether often
increasing its brightness from 10 to 100 times that of the
ordinary night sky. .........

“The light of the aurora is believed to be produced by the
streams of protons and electrons, which emerge from solar
upheavals and are trapped by the Earth’s magnetic field ......

“Most of the light ofan auroral display is produced in the
colors green, red and blue by the combining of electrons with
oxygen atoms and nitrogen molecules....’*!
The Meru mountain is supposed to be made up of jewels of
different colours because the light of an auroral display is of various
colours.

THE MERU AND THE BADAVAMUKHA

que eqAAey ATA SATS FT ATA |
saa arsed WRIT feaaTT fraaT ll V2 Ul

12. The heaven and the Meru mountain are at the centre of the land
(i.e., at the north pole); the bell and the Badavamukha are at the
centre of the water (i.¢., at the south pole).® The gods (residing
at the Meru mountain) and the demons (residing at the Badaya-

 

1. See ‘Robert H. Baker, Astronomy, East-West Student
Edition, New Dethi, 1965, pp. 312-14. ;

2. E, Go. Pa. ¥@:; F. qa rev. to 4a: | Pr reads eqae: Aa-
wey Teel ATA ,

3 FL. ware; Pr. wTUgT

4. Ni. So, Ya, featat

5. Cf. SidVr, Ul, iv, 4; VSi, Gola, vii. 11.


--- Page 197 ---
Verse 13 J THE FOUR CARDINAL CITIES , 123
mukha) consider themselves positively and permanently below
each other.

The above statement is based on the conception that half of the
Earth lying north of the equator is land and half of the Earth lying
south of the equator is water.

THE FOUR CARDINAL CITIES

saat at agral Aiseanay’ ahgta fragt |
qeaey saath Dae sas Cara MN ge
13. When it is sunrise at Lanka, it is sunset at Siddhapura, midday
at Yavakoti, and midnight at Romaka®

The time-distance relation js explained here with the help of four
cities supposed to lie on the equator separated by one-quarter of the
Earth’s circumference.

Lanka is supposed to be at the place where the meridian of
Ujjayini (long. 75°.43 E., lat. 23°.09 N) intersects the equator,
Yavakoti 90° to the east of Lanka, Romaka 90° to the west of Lanka,
and Siddhapura diametrically opposite to Lanka.

POSITIONS OF LANKA AND UJJAYINI

CAAATAMPART YRTATA ATHATA |
goafral META: TAGE TATATE: Ul Ve Ul

14. From the centres of the land and the water, at a distance of one-
quarter of the Earth’s circumference, lies Lanka ; and from
Lanka, at a distance of one-fourth thereof, exactly northwards,
lies Ujjayini.® .

 

1. Cf. PSi, xiii. 3; MSi, xvi. 7 (a-b). 2. F. weraraedna:
3. So. avHeai 4, D. war

5. B, farsa faite ; Ni, So. fawasdaa:

6. Cf. PSi, %%qg3.

7. Ni. SU, TSaeaia; Gh. Ni, Pa. Ra, Sa. note both readings

8. The same statement is made in KR, i. 33 (a-b); SiDVy, OL,
Bhuvanakoga, 40 (c-d) ; SiSi, II, Bhuvanakoga, 15 (a-b).


--- Page 198 ---
124 GOLA SECTION [ Gols Sp,

The positions of ‘Lanks and Ujjayini have been given because
the Hindu prime meridian is supposed to pass through them. By stating
the positions of Lanka and Ujjayini, Aryabhata has, by implication,
defined the position of the prime meridian. :

The distance of Ujjayini from Lanka as stated in the above
passage is one-sixteenth of the Earth’s circumference. This makes the
latitude of Ujjayini equal to 22° 30’ N. This is in agreement with the
teachings of the earlier followers of Aryabhata, such as Bhaskara I /
(A. D. 629), Deva? (A. D. 689), and Lalla® and the interpretations
of the commentators Someévara, Siryadeva (b. A.D. 1191) and
Paramegvara (A.D. 1431).4 Even the celebrated Bhaskara JI5 (A.D.
1150) has chosen to adopt it.

But Brahmagupta (A.D. 628) differed from this view. He takes
Ujjayini at a distance of one-fifteenth of the Earth’s circumference from
Lanka‘, and likewise the latitude of Ujjayini as equal to 24°N. Some
of the commentators of Aryabhatiya, who favoured Brahmagupta’s
view, changed the reading taccaturamse into paficadasarse. The
commentator Stryadeva, who first interprets the original reading
taccaturamée, later remarks :

Ujjayimi lahkayah paticadasamse samottaratah |

(i. e., Ujjayini is at a distance of one-fifteenth of the Earth’s cireum-
ference to the exact north of Lanka) is the proper reading because
Brahmagupta writes :

Lankottarato ’yanti bhuparidheh paticadasabhage |

(i. e., Avanti is to the north of Lanki at a distance of one-fifteenth
of the Earth’s circumference).”

In defence of the reading paiicadasamse, Stryadeva again
Says:

 

1. See hiscomm, on 4, i. 7, whére he gives the distance
between Lanka and Ujjayini as approximately equal to 200 yojanas.
2. See KR, i. 33 (a-b).
3. See SiDVr, II, Bhuvanakosa, 40 (c-d).
4. Parameévara notes the other reading WazqTiz also.
5. See SiSi, Il; Bhuvanakosa, 15 (a-b).
6. See BrSpSi, xxi. 9 (c-d). .


--- Page 199 ---
Verse 14] LANKA AND UJJAYINI > 185

"24° to the north of Lanka lies Ujjayini. So, when the Sun
is situated at the end of Gemini, then, due to its greatest declination
of 24°, it causes midday when it is exactly overhead at Ujjayini. In
a place to the north of Ujjayini, the Sun is never exactly overhead.
To the south (of Ujjayini), it is exactly overhead when the Sun’s
north declination becomes equal to the latitude of the place. There-
after it gets depressed towards the north. So the instruction of Ujjayim
for the knowledge of a place having a latitude equal to the Sun’s
greatest declination is appropriate. Wefdo not see any use in the
instruction of Ujjayini lying at a distance of one-sixteenth of the Earth's
circumference (to the north of Laika), for its latitude being 22°30’ N..
it is of no use anywhere...... So we have rightly said: Ujjayini
lankayah pattcadasamse samottaratah.”

The commentator Nilakantha (1500 A.D.) mentions the reading
taccaturamse but adopts the reading paticadasamsSe taking it to be
correct. Writes he:

“Some read taccaturamse. According to them the word tat
means one-fourth of the Earth’s circumference, one-fourth of
one-fourth is indeed one-sixteenth. So there is difference of
meaning between the two. (However,) between facts there can
be no option. So only one of the two readings is correct.
Which of the two is correct can be decided upon from the
equinoctial midday shadow at Ujjayini. That the janapada
of Ujjayini lies at a distance of one-fifteenth of the Earth’s
circumference is well known from other works on astronomy.
For the son of Jisnu (i.¢., Brahmagupta) writes :

‘Avanti is to the north of Lanka at a distance of one-fifteenth
of the Earth’s circumference’.

So also writes Varahamihira, who belonged to Avanti :

‘When the Sun is at the end of Gemini, it revolves 24° above
the horizon of the gods ; and at Avanti it is then exactly
overhead (at midday)’.

This shows thatthe latitude there is 24°. Now 24° is one-
fifteenth of a%tircle and not one-sixteenth, because there are
360° in the whole circle and 24° is one-fifteenth of 360°. So
the reading paficadasamée is the correct reading.”


--- Page 200 ---
126 GOLA SECTION { Gela Sn.

But he adds :

“However, that janapada being large and the latitude being
different at different places, somewhere (in that janapada) a
latitude of 24° is also possible. Whether it occurs at Ujjayini
or not, can be decided (only) by the people there. Varaha-
mihira has shown it to be 24° in respect of his village. Following
him the son of Jisnu, too, has said the same. But. Ujjayini is
to the south of that (village). There a latitude of 22} degrees
is also possible. In that case the other reading (taccaturarnse)
would be correct, for latitude has been stated (here). for
Ujjayini (and not for the village of Varahamihira).” -

The commentator Raghunatha-raja (1597 A.D.) adopts the
reading paficadasamse. He interprets the reading taccaturarnse also,
but he prefers the other reading on the same grounds as given by

Siiryadeva.

The majority of the Hindu astronomers, however, favours
Brahmagupta’s view and takes the latitude of Ujjayini as 24° N. But
there is no doubt that according to Aryabhata I it is 22° 30’ N.

VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE PORTION OF
THE BHAGOLA

qearardate Tea Faq TAT WATT |
arg yiraat yoararatinn Fan gy tl

15. One half of the Bhagola as diminished by the Earth’s semi.
diameter is visible from a level place (free from any
obstructions). The other one-half as increased by the Earth’s
semi-diameter remains hidden by the Earth?

What is meant is that that portion of the Bhagola is visible at a
place O on the Earth’s surface which lies above the sensible horizon
at O, i.e., which lies above the tangent plane to the Earth’s surface
at O, and that portion of the Bhagola which lies below the sensible
horizon at O is invisible at O.

 

1. Cf. Sid¥r I, vi. 35,


--- Page 201 ---
Verse 16 | MOTION OF THE BHAGOLA 127

From this we easily deduce that according to Aryabhata I
Sun’s mean horizontal parallax = 3’ 56"

Moon’s mean horizontal parallax=52' 30’,

the corresponding modern values being 8"°794 and 57’ 2"-7, respectively.

16.

MOTION OF THE BHAGOLA FROM THE NORTH
AND SOUTH POLES

Ran weata aataragesaed erat: Gay |
ay aqacand sfaqaeage Fat: Ul %g ll

The gods living in the north at the Meru mountain (i.e., at
the north pole) see one half of the Bhagola as revolving from
left to right (or clockwise) ; the demons living in the south
at the Badavamukha (i.¢., at the south pole), on the other hand,
see the other half as revolving from right to left (or anti-
clokwise).?

VISIBILITY OF THE SUN TO THE GODS,
MANES AND MEN

efraatd Fan qeaeeg hed eft aa Fat: | —
efgerard fire: afer: gftardfae aga: il 20 I

17. The gods see the Sun, after it has risen, for half a solar

year; so is done by the demons too. The manes living
on (the other side of ) the Moon see the Sun for half a lunar
month ; the men here see it for half a civil day.°

This verse stating how long do the gods (living at the north

pole), the demons (living at the south pole), the manes (living on
the other side of the Moon) and men see the Sun after it hac
once risen.

ee ee

. All others except So. wiaeat Tare
. Cf, PSi, xiii. 9.
Cf, PSi, xiii, 27.
Cf. PSi, xiii. 38,
Cf. PSi, xv. 14.

apwnre


--- Page 202 ---
128 GOLA SECTION { Gola Sn,

2. Khagola
THE PRIME VERTICAL, MERIDIAN AND HORIZON

qaiwnaaey ausaay aiaatad 4a |
Palast araeaed arat aera ll ec tl

18. The vertical circle which passes through the east amd west
points is the prime vertical, and the vertical circle passing
through the north and south points is the-meridian. The
circle which goes by the side of the above circles (like a
girdle) and on which the stars rise and set is the horizon.

P.C, Sengupta’s remark that “here we have the rational horizon
and not the apparent. horizon” is incorrect.

Since the centre of the Khagola is at the observer lying on the
surface of the Earth, the horizon is evidently the apparent or sensible
horizon and not the rational horizon.

EQUATORIAL HORIZON
qainaad ame we aq |
sequse Aya TIE! ay feral: tl ee Ui

19. The circle which passes through the east and west points and
meets (the meridian above the north point and below the
south point) at distances equal to the latitude (of the place)
from the horizon is the equatorial horizon (or six o’ clock
circle) on which the decrease and increase of the day and
night are measured.”

THE OBSERVER IN THE KHAGOLA
qainiedaraeareal cfeqrareat & |
warat AEA Tet TAY WAT SH Ul Re I

1. Cf, SiDVr, Il, ii. 2; VSi, Gola, iv 2.; SiSe, xvi. 29 (d) ;
Sit, Ul, vi. 3 (e-d) ; vii. 2 (cd).

2. Cf. BrSpSi, xxi. 50; SiDVr. Ul, ii. 3; VSI, Gola, iv. 3;
SiSe, xvi. 30; SiSi, IL, vi. 4; SuSi, Il, iv, 4.

3, F. tal, rev. to


--- Page 203 ---
Verse 22 ] THE AUTOMATIC SPHERE 129

20. The east.west line, the nadir-zenith line, and the north-south
line intersect where the observer is.1

What Aryabhata I means to say is that the centre of the Khagola
lies at the observer, or that (the position of ) the observer forms the
centre of the Khagola.

THE OBSERVER’S DRNMANDALA AND DRKKSEPAVRITA
SATAN THs ceaced gerfiaay |
THA TATSAAy ae cag FrUeTAA Ul 2 Ul

21. The great circle which is vertical in relation to the observer
and passes through the planet is the drimandala (i. e., the
vertical circle through the planet). The vertical circle which
passes through that point of the ecliptic which is three
signs behind the rising point of the ecliptic is the drkksepavrtta.

THE AUTOMATIC SPHERE (GOLA-YANTRA)
ears anTd THeaa: TATE TY MAT |
Gee dete BHAT aa sy BTAMAAT Ul Bz Ul

22. The Sphere (Go/a-yantra) which is made of wood, perfectly
spherical, uniformly dense all round but light (in weight) should
be made to rotate keeping pace with time with the help of
mercury, oil and water by the application of one’s own
intellect.

The Gola-yantra is the representation of the Bhagola.

The method used by Aryabhata for rotating the Sphere
(Bhagola) at therate of one rotation per twentyfour hours may be

briefly described in the words of the commentator SUryadeva as
follows :

“Having set up two pillars on the ground, one towards the
south and the other towards the north, mount on them the

 

1. Cf. SiDV, Il, vi. 33-34,
2. E. Ni. Pa. So. TItT
A. Bh, 17


--- Page 204 ---
GOLA SECTION { Gola Sn.

ends of the iron needle (rod) (which forms the axis of rotation
of the Sphere). In the holes of the Sphere, at the south and
north poles, pour some oil, so that the sphere may rotate
smoothly. Then, underneath the west point of the Sphere,
dig a pit and put into ita cylindrical jar with a hole in the
bottom and as deep as the circumference of the Sphere.
Fill it with water. Then having fixed a nail at the west point
of the Sphere, and having fastened one end ofa string to it,
carry the string downwards along the equator towards the
east point, then stretch it upwards and carry it to the west
point (again), and then fasten to it adry hollow gourd
(appropriately) filled with mercury and place it on the surface
of water inside the cylindrical jar underneath, which is
already filled with water. Then open the hole at the bottom
of the jar so that with the outflow of water, the water inside
the jar goes down. Consequently, the gourd which, due to
the weight of mercury within it, does not leave the water,
pulls the Sphere westwards. The outflow of water should
be manipulated in such a way that in 30 ghatis (=12 hours)
half the water of the jar flows out and the Sphere makes
one-half of a rotation, and similarly, in the next 30 ghatis
the entire water of the jar flows out, the gourd reaches
the bottom of the jar and the Sphere performs one complete
rotation. This is how one should, by using one’s intellect, rotate
the Sphere’ keeping pace with time.”

3. Spherical Astronomy
(1) Diurnal motion
THE LATITUDE-TRIANGLE

AMIR Sada Revs WATT |
Agassitaqas aeaeaaess:: HE 3 |

23. Divide half of the Bhagola lying in the visible half of the
Khagola by means of Rsines (so as to form latitude-triangles).
The Rsine of the latitude is the base of a Jatitude-triangle. The
Rsine of the colatitude is the upright of the same (triangle).

The statement “half of the Bhagola lying in the visible half
of the Khagola,” implies that the radius of the Earth is disregarded

 

1,

 

A. FEIT WAAR:


--- Page 205 ---
Verse 23 THE LATITUDE TRIANGLE 131

here and the centre of the Khagola is supposed to be coincident with
the centre of the Bhagola. What is meant is the standard Khagola, i.c.,
Khagola for the centre of the Earth.

A right-angled plane triangle whose sides are proportional
to Rsin 6, Rcos @ and R, where R (=3438') is the radius of the
Bhagola, is called a latitude-triangle (aksa-ksetra). The right-angled
plane triangle whose sides are equal to Rsin 6, Rcos @andR is the
main latitude-triangle, defined above.

The latitude-triangles play an important role in the solution
of the spherical triangles in Indian astronomy. For, a number of
results in astronomy are obtained simply by comparing two latitude-
triangles. Because of this importance of the latitude-triangles, Arya-
bhata II (c. 950A. D.) and Bhaskara IT (1150 A.D.) have given a list of
such triangles in their works. “It is only he who is versed in the latitude-
triangles,’ adds Bhaskara H, “that enjoys respect, fortune, fame, and

297

happiness”.

The latitude-triangles
(Aryabhata II’s list)

Base Upright Hypotenuse

(1) Rsin 6 Reos @ R

(2) equinoctial midday gnomon (=12) hypotenuse of equinoc-
shadow tial midday shadow

_ (3) earthsine Rsin 8 agra

(4) unmandalasatku first part of agra Rsin 3

(5) other part of agra unmandalasanku earthsine

(6) agra samasanku taddhyti

(7) Rsin 8 upper part of taddhrti samaSaitku

(taddhrti—earthsine)

(Bhaskara Il’s additional triangle)

(8) first part of agra upper part of upper part of
: samasanku taddhrti

1, atari areqerqaits sat fade arardgegarart
SiSi, Grahaganita, iii. 13° (c-)


--- Page 206 ---
332 GOLA SECTION [ Gcla Sn.

Explanation : When a heavenly body is on the six o’ clock
circle, the perpendicular dropped from it on the plane of the horizon
is called unmandalasanku ; the distance of the foot of the perpendicular
from the east-west line is called the first part of agra; the
distance of the heavenly body from the rising-setting line is called the
earthsine. When the heavenly body is on the prime vertical, the
perpendicular dropped from it on the east-west line is called sama-
Sanku; the perpendicular dropped from it on the rising-setting line
is called taddhrti; the distance between the east-west line and the
rising-setting line is called agra. When a perpendicular is dropped
from the foot of the samasanku on the taddhrti, the latter is divided
into two parts called upper and lower; when a perpendicular is
dropped from the foot of this perpendicular on the samaganku, the
latter is divided into two parts called upper and lower; when from the
same foot a perpendicular is dropped on the agra, the latter is divided
into two parts called the ‘first part of agra’ and the ‘other part of agra’.

RADIUS OF THE DAY-CIRCLE
TVA SATATTHAMT TATATL |
fiyazaraRrqacaeetraTareRee: Il 2B

24. Subtract the square of the Rsine of the given declination from
the square of the radius, and take the square root of the difference.
The result is the radius of the day circle, whether the heavenly
body is towards the north or towards the south of the equator.?

That is,
day radius= 4/R?—(Rsin 5), (1)
. Rsin Ax Rsin 24°
Rsin s=———— ’ (2)

A and 8 being, respectively, the Sun’s tropical longitude and declination
of the heavenly body.

Aryabhata does not state formula (2) for finding Rsin 3,
because it can be easily derived by applying the rule of three as
follows : “When the Rsine of the Sun’s tropical longitude is equal to
R, the Rsine of the Sun’s declination is equal to Rsin 24°; what then

 

 

1. B.C. E. Su. qa aa
2. Of. MBh, iii. 6.


--- Page 207 ---
Verse 25 j RIGHT-ASCENSIONS OF THE SIGNS 133

will be the value of the Rsine of the Sun’s declination when the Rsine

of the Sun’s tropical longitude has the value Rsina? The result is
Rsin 3.”

RIGHT ASCENSIONS OF ARIES, TAURUS AND GEMINI

TIENT MIATASTMITT EST |
VUENATMET "HATTTARITAIVSAT By II

25. Multiply the day radius corresponding to the greatest declination
(on the ecliptic) by the desired Rsine (of one, two or three signs)
and divide by the corresponding day radius: the result is the
Rsine of the right ascension (of one, two or three signs),
measured from the first point of Aries along the equator.‘

Let «, B and y denote the right ascensions of one sign, two signs
and three signs, respectively, and 81, 33 and 83 the declinations at the
last points of the signs Aries, Taurus and Gemini, respectively. Then

Rcos 8, (1)
Rsin B= Rsin 60° Reos 24

Reos 8, (2)
Rein y= Rsin 90° x Reos 24°

Reos 8, (3)

Now, Reos 8,=3366’, Rcos §,=3218’ and Reos 3;=3141’.
Hence substituting these values and simplifying, we get 21670’
P=3465’ and y==5400’. Consequently,

right ascension of Aries =%—1670 respirations
right ascension of Taurus==8—%—1795 respirations

right ascension of Gemini =y— 8 = 1935 respirations.

 

1, So. gd

2. Ra. Aw for Brame
3. Ra. So. Stat:

4. Gf. MBh, iii. 9.


--- Page 208 ---
134 GOLA SECTION [ Gola Sn.

The right ascensions of Aries, Taurus and Gemini in the reverse
order are'the right ascensions of Cancer, Leo and Virgo ; and the right
ascensions of the first six signs, Aries etc. in the reverse order
are the right ascensions of the last six signs, Libra etc.

Table 22. Right ascensions of the signs of the ecliptic

rere

 

Sign Right ascension in respirations Sign
1 Aries 1670 12 Pisces
2 Taurus 1795 11 Aquarius
3 Gemini 1935 10 Capricorn
4 Cancer 1935 9 Sagittarius
5 Leo 1795 8 Scorpio
6 Virgo 1670 7 Libra

eR

The Indian method for deriving formula (1) is as follows :

Consider the Celestial Sphere for fa place on the equator.
Let the first point of Aries coincide with the east point of the horizon ;
and let A be the last point of the sign Aries, AB the perpendicular
from A on the eastwest line, and AC the perpendicular from A
on the plane of the horizon. Also let G be the last point of the
sign Gemini, GO the perpendicular from G on the east-west line and
GM the perpendicular from G on the plane of the horizon.

Then comparing the triangles ABC and GOM, which are
evidently similar, we have

ABXGM
GO

Rsin 30° x Reos 24°
R

AC=

Now Rsin*: R :: AC: Recos 8 Therefore

Rsin @ —= ACXR_ _ Rsin 30° R cos 24°
R cos 8 R cos 8

 

The rationales of formulae (2) and (3) are similar,


--- Page 209 ---
Verse 26 } EARTHSINE 435

EARTHSINE
rEATfaMasal Aaah TAY AT |
wares fast waafasat fafa: at ul 2g tl

26. The Rsine of latitude multiplied by the Rsine of the given decli-
nation and divided by the Rsine of colatitude gives the earthsine,
lying in the plane of the day circle. Thisis also equal to the
Rsine of half -the excess or defect of the day or night (in the
plane of the day circle).?

That is,

Rsin &x Rsin
Reos ¢
This result may be easily obtained by comparing the following
latitude-triangles ; .

earthsine=

Base Upright Hypotenuse
(1) earthsine Rsin 8 agra
(2) Rsin ¢ Reos ¢ R

By the ‘excess or defect of the day or night’ is meant the amount
by which the day or night at the local place is greater or less than
30 ghatis (or 12 hours).

The earthsine, as the text says, is the Rsine of half the excess
or defect of the day or night in the plane of the day circle. Since the -
time is measured on the equator, one should first find the corresponding
Rsine in the plane of the equator and then reduce that to the arc
of the equator.

The Rsine of half the excess or defect of the day or night
in the plane of the equator is called carardhajya and is obtained by
the following formula :

earthsine X R

jya == —______—__.—_—-
carardhajy day radius

The corresponding arc of the equator is called carardha and gives the
amount by which the semi-duration of the day or night at the local
place is greater or less than 15 ghatis.

 

 

1. F. went for at
2. Cf. PSi, iv, 34; MBh,.iii. 6,


--- Page 210 ---
136 GOLA SECTION { Gola Sa.

The carardha is also equal to the difference between the oblique
and right ascensions and so it is called the ‘ascensional difference’.
The oblique ascension is the time of rising of an arc of the ecliptic. at
the local place and the right ascension is the time of rising of an arc
of the ecliptic at the equator.

RISING OF THE FOUR QUADRANTS AND OF
THE INDIVIDUAL SIGNS

saata & aHTERaEEelaa (ere |
TMS EA TATA HAHA! Ul VW Ul

' 27. The first as well as the last quadrant of the ecliptic rises (above
the local horizon) in one quarter of a sidereal day diminished
by (the ghafis of) the ascensional difference. The other two
(viz. the second and third quadrants) rise in one quarter of a
sidereal day as increased by the same (i.e. the ghafis of the
ascensional difference). The times of rising of the individual
signs (Aries, Taurus and Gemini) in the first quadrant are
obtained by subtracting their ascensional differences from their
right ascensions in the serial order ; in the second quadrant
by adding the ascensional differences of the same signs to the
corresponding right ascensions in the reverse order. The times
of risings of the six signs in the first and second quadrants
(Aries, etc.) taken in the reverse order give the risings of the
six signs im the third and fourth quadrants (Libra, etc.).’ -

Let Fig, 10 represent the Celestial Sphere (Khagola) for the
local place. SEN is the horizon, RET the equator, UEV the ecliptic
and PEQ the equatorial horizon. The small circle WBV is the day
circle through V (the end of the first quadrant of the ecliptic).

EV is the first quadrant of the ecliptic. At the moment the
first point of Aries coincides with E. With the motion of the Celestial
Sphere E will move along the equator and V along the diurnal circle

1, D. 8t amar

2, E, afgat

3. A. E. Gh. Go. Ni. Pa. salenaa:
4. Of, PSi, iv. 31; LBA, iii, 6.


--- Page 211 ---
Verse 27 J RISINGS ‘OF THE SIGNS 137

Fig. 10

 

in the direction of the arrowhead. When V reaches A, the whole of
the first quadrant of the ecliptic, which is at the moment on the point
of rising above the horizon, will be above the local horizon. So the
time of rising of the first quadrant of the ecliptic at the local place
is the time taken by V in moving from Vto A, or, what is the same
thing, the time taken by T in moving from T to C. This time is given
by the are
TC or ET~EC

of the equator (because time is measured on the equator). Since ET
is one-fourth of the equator, it corresponds to one-quarter of a sidereal
day. So the time of rising of the first quadrant of the ecliptic
=one quarter of a sidereal day—ghatis corresponding to arc EC
=15 ghatts—ghatis of ascensional difference. qd)

Also, the first quadrant of the ecliptic is, at the moment,
at the point of rising above the equatorial horizon QEP. When
the point V reaches the point B, the first quadrant of the ecliptic
will be completely above the equatorial horizon. The time taken
by V to reach B is equal to the time taken by T in reaching E. So
the time of rising of the first quadrant of the ecliptic above the
equatorial horizon is equal to the arc ET of the equator, which has
been just shown to correspond to one quarter of a sidereal day or
15 ghatis. This differs from (1) by the time given by the arc EC of
the equator. EC therefore gives the difference between the times of
rising of the first quadrant at the local and equatorial places. EC is,

. therefore, called the ‘ascensional difference’ of the first quadrant (or
the ascensional difference of the last point of the first quadrant).
A. Bh, 18


--- Page 212 ---
38 GOLA SECTION { Gola Sn.
Hence, from (1), we have
(1) Time of rising of the first quadrant at the local place
=15 ghatis—ghatis of the ascensional difference.
When the first point of Aries is at E, the first point of Libra
is at the west point W. The first point of Libra will reach the point E

exactly after 30 ghafis and then the second quadrant of the ecliptic will
be completely above the local horizon. Hence we have

(2) Time of rising of the second quadrant of the ecliptic at the
local place :
=30 ghatis —(15 ghatis—ghatis of asc. diff.)
=15 ghatis+ghafis of asc. diff.
Similarly, we can show that

(3) Time of rising of the third quadrant of the ecliptic at the
local’ place =15 ghatis+ ghatis of asc. diff.

(4) ‘Time of rising of the fourth quadrant of the ecliptic at the
local place=15 ghatis— ghatis of asc. diff.

Preceeding exactly in the same manner, we can show that

Time of rising of the sign Aries at the local place

=Time of rising of the sign Aries at the equator—asc. diff. of
the last point. of Aries. (@)

Time of rising of the signs Aries and Taurus at the local place

=Time of rising of the signs Aries and Taurus at the equator—
asc. diff. of the last point of Taurus. (3)

Time of rising of the signs Aries, Taurus and Gemini at the local
place

= Time of rising of the signs Aries, Taurus and Gemini at the
equator—asc. diff. of the last point of Gemini. (4)

Diminishing (2), (3), (4), each by the preceding (if any), we have

Time of rising of the sign Aries at the local place

=Time of rising of the sign Aries at the equator—asc. diff. of
Aries.

Time of rising of the sign Taurus at the local place

=Time of rising of the sign Taurus at the equator—(ase. diff. of
the. last point of Taurus~asc. diff. of the last point of Aries)

=Time of rising of the sign: Taurus at.the equator—asc. diff. of
Taurus.


--- Page 213 ---
Verse 28 ] RSINE OF THE ALTITUDE 139

Time of rising of the sign Gemini at the local place
==Time of rising of the sign Gemini at the equator—(asc. diff.

of the last point of Gemini—asc. diff. of the last point of Taurus)

==Time of rising of the sign Gemini at the equator—asc. diff. of
Gemini.

Let A, B, C be the times of rising of the signs Aries, Taurus,
and Gemini at the equator and a, b, c the ascensional differences of the
same signs in their respective order. Then the times of rising of the
signs at the local place are as shown in the following table.

Table 23. Times of rising of the signs at the local place

si sss SSS eyensahsnsehennnhgeeh

 

Sign Time of rising Sign
1 Aries A-a 12 Pisces
2 Taurus B—b _ 11 Aquarius
3 Gemini 'C—e 10 Capricorn
4 Cancer C+e 5 Sagittarius
5 Leo B+8 ‘8 Scorpio
6 Virgo A-+a 7 Libra

 

RSINE OF THE ALTITUDE

arenerat fefanaracameat Sar |
epeurateaaa Raw TaN: TEs | Re

28. Find the Rsine of the arc of the day circle from the horizon
{up tothe point occupied by the heavenly body) at the given
time ; multiply that by the Rsine of the colatitude and divide
by the radius ; the result is the Rsine df the altitude (of the
‘heayenly body) at the given time elapsed since ‘senrise in
the forenoon or to elapse before sunset in the afternoon.

By ‘the Rsine of the arc of the day circle from the horizon up
to the point occupied by a heavenly body’, is meant the distance of the
heavenly body from. the rising-setting line, which is known.as istahy ti.


--- Page 214 ---
140

GOLA SECTION { Gola Sn,

Thus the formula in the text may be stated as

istahrtix Roos ¢

Rsin (Sun’s altitude) = R

This formula may be obtained by comparing the following
latitude-triangles :

Base Upright Hypotenuse

(1) sankyagra or Rsin (Sun’s altitude) istahrti
Sankutala
(2) Rsin¢ Reos ¢ R

The method intended by Ayabhata I may be fully explained in

the case of the Sun as follows :

“With the help of the Sun’s declination and the local latitude
calculate the Sun’s ascensional difference. Subtract the Sun’s
ascensional difference from or add that to the given time
reduced to asus (1 ghati=360 asus), according as the Sun is
in the northern or southern hemisphere. By the Rsine of
that difference or sum multiply the day radius and divide by
the radius. Ifthe Sun is in the northern hemisphere, add
the earthsine to the result obtained; if the Sun is in. the
southern hemisphere, subtract the earthsine from the result
obtained : the result is the istakyti. Multiply that by the
Rsine of the colatitude and divide by the radius: the result
is the Rsine of the Sun’s altitude.”

‘When the Sun is the northern hemisphere and the given time
reduced to asus is less than the Sun’s ascensional difference
reduced to minutes of arc, one should proceed as follows :

‘Subtract the asus of the given time from the minutes of the
Sun’s ascensional difference; multiply the difference by the
day radius and divide by the radius. Subtract whatever is
obtained from the earthsine : the result is the istahyti. Multiply
that by the Rsine of colatitude and divide by the radius ;
the result is the Rsine of the Sun’s altitude as before’.

4

See MBh, iii. 18-20, 25, Also see PSi, iv. 41-43,


--- Page 215 ---
Verse 29-30 ] SANRVAGRA AND AGRA 141

SANKVAGRA
fiqassitaaftcas tae: qeg: aaa ET |
HATTA TTA: SATIN ll VSI

29. Multiply the Rsine of the Sun’s altitude for the given time by
the Rsine of latitude and divide by the Rsine of colatitude ;
the result is the Sun’s ’sankvagra, which is always to the south
of the Sun’s rising-setting line.?

The Sun’s sankvagra is the distance of the Sun’s projection on
the plane of the observer’s horizon from the Sun’s rising-setting line.

Or, it is the projection of the istahyti on the plane of the observer’s
horizon.

The formula stated in the text is
Sun’s satkvogra= Rsin (Sun 8 altitude) x R sin ¢ ,
Reos ¢

which can be easily derived by comparing the following lfatitude-
triangles :

Base ‘Upright Hypotenuse
(1) Sun’s sankvagra Rsine (Sun’s altitude) istahrti
(2) Rsin ¢ Roos ¢ R

Although the rule is stated for the Sun, it is applicable to any
heavenly body whatsoever.

SUN’S AGRA
qa aesaraieat aa AAT |
sat erage TeatsHlaT Tare Fafa | ge Ul

30. Multiply the Rsine of the (Sun's tropical) longitude for the
given time by the Rsine of the Sun’s greatest declination and
then divide by the Rsine of colatitude ; the resulting Rsine

is the Sun’s agra on the eastern or western horizon.®

1. Gh. faga: for afta:
2. Cf. MBh, iii. 54; LBA, iii. 16.
3. Of. MBh, iii, 37; LBh, iii. 21,


--- Page 216 ---
142 ‘GOLA SECTION [ Gol Sn.

The Sun’s agra is the distance of the rising or setting Sun from
the east-west line.

The formula stated in the text is

: Rsin AX Rsin 24°
Sun’s agra — ose

where 4 is the Sun’s tropical longitude, and ¢ the latitude of
the place.

This formula may be obtained as follows :

Comparing the latitude-triangles :

Base Upright Hypotenuse
(63) earthsine Rsia $ agra
(2) Rsin ¢ Reos ¢ R
we get
Geers g _ Rsin 8xR
‘Sun’s @egr. Bose
But
Rsin 8 == Rsin A x Rsin 24 ;
R
Therefore
Sun’s agra= Rsin Ax Rsin 24°
R cos ¢

RSINE OF THE SUN’S PRIME VERTICAL ALTITUDE

a fyrssaia Az fgaqearata deg fiqar |
fagaesamr fruzat wea: Waist ges: Ul 22 Ul

When that (agra) is less than the Rsine of the latitude and
the Sun is in the northern hemisphere, multiply that (Sun’s
agra) by the Rsine of colatitude and divide by the Rsine
of latitude ; the result is the Rsine of the Sun’s altitude
when the Sun is on the prime vertical.?

31,

——._

1. Of. MBh, iii. 37 (¢-d)-38,


--- Page 217 ---
Verse 31} SUN'S PRIME VERTICAL ALTITUDE 143

That is,
Sun’s agra X Reos ¢
Rsin ¢ >

where a@ is the Sun’s prime vertical altitude.

Rsin a=

This formula may be easily derived by comparing the following
latitude-triangles :

Base Upright Hypotenuse
qd) agra Rsin a istahy ti
(2) Rsin ¢ Reos ¢ R

The conditions necessary for the existence of the prime vertical
altitude of the Sun are: (1) that the Sun should be in thé northern
hemisphere, and (2) that the Sun’s declination should be less than the
latitude of the place. The condition given by Aryabhata that the
Sun’s agra should be less than the Rsine of the latitude is incorrect.
Brahmagupta (A.D. 628) has therefore rightly criticised Aryabhata on
this account :

“The. statement (of Aryabhata) that the Sun, in the northern.
hemisphere, enters the prime vertical when the (Sun’s) agra is
less than the Rsine of the latitude is incorrect, because this,
happens when the Rsine of the (Sun’s) declination satisfies
this condition (and not the Sun’s agra).””!

It is interesting to note that the commentator Bhaskara I
(A.D. 629), committed the same error in his Maha-Bhaskariya®, but
he has corrected himself in his Laghu-Bhaskariya®

Stiryadeva (b. A.D. 1191), SomeSvara, and other commentators,
however, have interpreted the word sa as referring to the Sun’s
' declination and not.to the Sun’s agra,

Although the rule in vss. 30-31 is.stated for the Sun, it is appli-
cable to any heavenly body whatsoever.

1. BrSpSi, xi. 22.
2, MBh, iii. 37.
3. LB, iii, 22,

 


--- Page 218 ---
144 GOLA SECTION [ Gola Sa,

SUN’S GREATEST GNOMON AND
THE SHADOW THEREOF

fafisrgaaaratat ar sat ar wt AaPsSe |
AUNATAASA STAT THVT! AT 1-32 Ul

32. The Rsine of the degrees of the (Sun’s) altitude above the
horizon (at midday when the Sun is on the meridian) is the
greatest gnomon (on that day). The Rsine of the (Sun’s)
zenith distance (at that time) is the shadow of the same
gnomon.

The Sun’s zenith distance at midday
=$~3 or $48,
according as the Sun is in the northern or southern hemisphere.
Consequently, the greatest gnomon or the Rsine- of the Sun’s
altitude at midday
=Rcos (¢~58) or Reos (¢+8),

and the shadow of the greatest gnomon or the Rsine of the Sun’s zenith
distance at midday

= Rsin (¢~8) or Rsin (¢ +8),
according as the Sun is in the northern or southern hemisphere.

(2) Parallax in a solar eclipse
RSINE OF THE ZENITH DISTANCE OF
THE CENTRAL ECLIPTIC POINT
HASNT TTT SATATATT Tq FATT |
THIS AM AMS TET (1 32 Ul

33, Divide the product of the madhyajya and the udayajya by the
radius. The square root of the difference between the squares
of that (result) and the madhyajya is the (Sun’s or Moon’s) own
arkksepa?

1 F. weet

2. Gf. PSH, ix. 19-20; MBh,v.19,


--- Page 219 ---
Verse 33 } DRKKSEPA 145

The Sun’s madhyajya is the Rsine of the zenith distance of the
‘meridian ecliptic point. The Sun’s udayajya is the Rsine of the
amplitude of the rising point of the ecliptic. The Sun’s drkksepa( jya)
is the Rsine of the zenith distance of that point of the ecliptic which is
at the shortest distance from the zenith.

The Moon’s madhyajya is the Rsine of the zenith distance of
that point of the Moon’s orbit which lies on the observer’s meridian.
The Moon’s udayajya is the Rsine of the amplitude of that point of the
Moon’s orbit which lies on the eastern horizon of the observer. The
Moon’s drkksepa(jya).is the Rsine of that point of the Moon’s orbit
which is at the shortest distance from the zenith.

Let Z be the zenith, M the meridian ecliptic point and C that
point of the ecliptic which is at shortest distance from the zenith. Then
in the triangle ZCM

Rsin (arc ZM)=Sun’s madhyajya,
ZZCM =90°,
and Rsin (MZC) =Sun’s udayajya.

Therefore

i in (MZC
Rsin (arc MC)= Rsin (arc zx Rsin ( )
__Sun’s madhyajya x Sun’s udayajya
~ R
The final result, viz.

Sun’s drkksepajya= / (Sun’s madhyajya)*—(Rsin MC)*

- is obtained by treating the triangle formed by the Rsines of the sides

~ of the triangle ZCM as a plane right-angled triangle (which assumption
is however incorrect).

 

t The Moon’s dykksepajya has been similarly obtained by taking
: the Moon’s orbit in place of the ecliptic.

 

Brahmagupta has rightly criticised the above rule for being
inaccurate.!

 

1. See BrSpSi, xi, 29-30,

A. Bh, 19

 


--- Page 220 ---
“146 / GOLA SECTION [ Gola Sn.

DRGGATIJYAS OF THE SUN AND THE MOON
~ | .
THEPATH Aaa Fat BEIM: FIN |

34, (i) The square root of the difference between the squares of (i)
the Rsine of the zenith distance (of the Sun or Moon) and (ii)
the drkksepajya, is the (Sun’s or Moon’s) own drggatij ‘ya.

The Sun’s drggatijya is the Rsine of the arcual distance of the
zenith from the secondary to the ecliptic passing through the Sun.

The Moon’s drggatijya is the Rsine of the arcual distance
of the zenith from the secondary to the Moon’s orbit passing through
the Moon.

The formula for the (Sun’s or Moon’s) drggatijya stated in
the text is

drggatijya= 4/[Rsin (z.d.)#—(drkksepajya)? .

This formula is correct and can be proved as follows: Let CS
be the ecliptic and K its pole; S the Sun and Z the zenith ; KZC and
KS the secondaries to the ecliptic; and ZA the perpendicular to
KS. Since the arcs ZC and ZA are perpendicular to CS and AS
respectively,

(Rsin ZA)? =(Rsin ZS)*—-(Rsin ZC)*,
i.e., (Sun’s drggatijya)*=(Sun’s drgjya)*—(Sun’s drkksepajya)*.
Similarly,
(Moon's dyggatijya)*=(Moon’s drgj ya)?—(Moon’s dykksepaj, ya)*.
According to Brahmagupta (A.D. 628), this is wrong. Says he :
“Drkksepajya is the base and drgjy@ the hypotenuse ; the square root

of the difference between their squares is the dyhnatijya (=drggatijya).
This configuration is also improper.’”* .

Brahmagupta’s criticism is valid ifthe drggati means “the arc
of the ecliptic lying between the central ecliptic point and the Sun or
Moon” as explained by the commentator Suryadeva.

 

—

1. Cf. MBh, v. 23; LBh, v, 7(c-d)-8 (a-b).
2. BrSpSi, xi. 27,


--- Page 221 ---
Verse 34 ] PARALLAX 147

PARALLAX OF THE SUN AND THE MOON

STM |
fefad ear eaarar yearend TATA | Qe

34. (ii) On account of (the sphericity of) the Earth, parallex
increases from zero at the zenith to the maximum value equal
to the Earth’s semi-diameter (as measured in the spheres of
the Sun and the Moon) at the horizon.

The word drkchaya in the text means parallax.

The instruction of the text implies, according to the commen-
tators, the following formulae :

Earth’s semi-diameter x drggatijya

parallax in longitude = R yojanas

in the sphere of the planet concerned

Earth’s semi-diameter x drggatijya

: > 7 minutes.
planet’s true distance in yojanas

Earth’s semi-diameter x drkksepajya

parallax in latitude= R yojanas

Earth’s semi-diameter x drkksepajya
planet’s true distance in yojanas

minutes.

On the use of the word syadrkksepa, Bhaskara I observes :

“The orbits of the Sun and the Moon being different, the (five)
Rsines (viz., udayajyd, madhyajya, drkksepajya, drgjya and
arggatijya) for them are said to differ. This difference is

indicated. by the words ‘svadrkksepa’ etc. of the Master
(Aryabhata 1).’”

 

1. E, tagqaeran
2. MBh, v.12,


--- Page 222 ---
148 GOLA SECTION T Gole Sn,

2. The visibility corrections

VISIBILITY CORRECTION AKSADRKKARMA
FOR THE MOON

fidaqangsa asagaga’ wae WAATITA |

saa wana afar sara We UM Zu Ul

35. Multiply the Rsine ef the latitude of the local place by the
Moon’s latitude and divide (the resulting product) by the Rsine
of the colatitade : (the result is the aksadrkkarma) for the
Moon). When the Moon is to the north (of the ecliptic), it
should be subtracted from the Moon’s longitude in the case of
the rising of the Moon and added to the Moon’s longitude in the
case of the setting of the Moon; when the Moon is to the south
(of the ecliptic), it should be added to the Moon’s longitude (in
the case of the rising of the Moon) and subtracted from the
Moon’s longitude (in the the case of the setting of the Moon).®
That is

aksadrkkarma

Rsin ¢X Moon’s latitude _
Reos ¢ .

Fig. 11

 

1. AB.CEF. Ni. Ra. Su. afaat; D. fagat 9 2. D. qantas
3. The same rule occurs in PSi (Paulisa), ‘v, 8; XK, I, vi. 3;
MBh, vi. 1-2(a-b) ; LBh, vi. 1-2; KR, vs 2,


--- Page 223 ---
Verse 36 J VISIBILITY CORRECTIONS 149

Let the figure represent the Celestial Sphere (Khagoja) for the
local place in latitude ¢, SEN is the eastern horizon and Z the zenith :
vE isthe equator and P its north pole; yT is the ecliptic and K its
north pole. Suppose that the Moon is rising at the point M’ on
the horizon. Let M bethe point where the secondary to the ecliptic
drawn through M’ meets the ecliptic, L the point where the hour
circle through M‘ meets the ecliptic and T the point where the horizon
intersects. the ecliptic. Then the arc TL of the ecliptic is called the
aksadykkarma and the arc LM of the ecliptic is called the
ayanadykkarma.

Let A be the point where the diurnal circle through M intersects
the hour circle through M’ and B the point where the diurnal circle
through M intersects the horizon. Then, since MM' is small, regarding
the triangle M’AB as plane, we have

Rsin (BM’A) x M’A
Rsin (M’BA)
___ Rsin (BM’A) x M’M
~_Rsin (M’BA)
Rsin ¢x Moon’s latitude
Reos ¢ ,

Assuming the aksadrkkarma as roughiy equal to arc AB,

Aryabhata gives .

arc AB== approx.

Rsin ¢x Moon’s latitude
Rcos ¢
This rule is generally used when the celestial latitude of the
body concerned is small. When the celestial latitude is large, a more
accurate rule is prescribed,”

aksadrkkarma=

VISIBILITY CORRECTION AYANADRKKARMA
OF THE MOON

Aguaaqugaay Rearssraray |
SaMMTIARAMTaAa eau IIA AFT U1 3g

36. Multiply the Rversed sine of the Moon’s (tropical) longitude (as
increased by three signs) by the Moon’s latitude and also by the
(Rsine of the Sun’s) greatest declination and divide (the resulting

 

1, See BrSpSi, x. 18-19; SiDVr, J, xi. 12-13; and SiSi
vii. 6. Bhaskara II gives a slightly modified formula for small
celestial latitude also. See SiSi, J, vii, 7. The most accurate formula
occurs in SITV, vii, 103-104,


--- Page 224 ---
150. . GOLA SECTION { Gola Sn.

product) by the square of the radius. When the Mcon’s latitude
is north, it should be subtracted from or added to the Moon’s
longitude, according as the Moon’s ayana is north or scuth (i.e.,
according as the Moon isin the six signs beginning with the
tropical sign Capricorn or in those beginning with the tropical
sign Cancer) ; when the Moon’s latitude is south, it should be
added or subtracted, (respectively).

That is
Rvyers (M+90°) x Moon’s latitude x Rsin 24°
ayanadrkkarma= R?

where M is the Moon’s tropical longitude.
The rationale of the formula is as follows :
From triangle M'MA (See Fig. 11, p. 148), we have
° Rsin (MM’A) x Rsin (arc MM’)

 

are MA= R approx.
ayanavalana x Moon’s latitude
=? A PLOX.

But (vide infra vs. 45), we have

Rvers (M+90°) xR sin 24°
ayanavalana= rs

Rvers (M +90°) x Moon’s latitude x Rsin 24°
arc MA= BR
Assuming the arc LM of the ecliptic (which denotes the ayana-
drkkarma) as approximately equal to arc MA, we have

R vers (M+90°) x Moon’s latitude x Rsin 24°
ayanadrkkarma= R?

_ When the ayanadrkkarma and aksadrkkarma are applied to the
rising or setting Moon, we get the longitude of that point of the ecliptic
which rises or sets with the Moon.

There is difference of opinion regarding the interpretation of
the word utkramanam. The commentator Somegvara interprets it
as meaning “The Rversed sine of the Moon’s longitude as increased
by three signs”, whereas the commentators Bhaskara I, Stryadeva
and Paramegvara interpret it as meaning “The Rversed sine of the

1, The same rule occurs in KK, J, vi. 2; MBh, vi. 2 (c-d)-3 ;
LBh, vi. 3-4; KR, v. 3. More accurate formulae occur in SiSi, I,
vii. 4,5 and in SiTV, vii. 77-80, ,


--- Page 225 ---
Verse 38 J OCCURRENCE OF AN ECLIPSE 151

Moon’s longitude as diminished by three signs.”2 The commentator
Raghunatha-raja interprets it as meaning Rvers (M+90°) or Rvers
(M—90°), according asthe desired ayana commences with Capricorn
or with Cancer.

We have followed Someégvara’s interpetation, because it agrees
with the teachings of Aryabhata in stanza 45 below and also because
it agrees with the teachings in his midnight system.”

‘Brahmagupta has modified this rule by replacing the Rversed
sine of the Moon’s longitude as increased by three signs by the Rsine
of the same. The commentator Nilakantha, however, interprets the
word utkramanam itself as meaning “the Rsine of the complement of
the Moon’s longitude’’.

(4) Eclipses of the Moon and the Sun

CONSTITUTION OF THE MOON, SUN, EARTH AND SHADOW
AND THE ECLIPSERS OF THE SUN AND MOON

WR TIAA SHa: “ATyRSTATA aT TAAL |
areata gat ad, afd vedt a yeaa Ul Zo |

37. The Moon is water, the Sun is fire, the Earth is earth, and what
is called Shadow is darkness (caused by the Earth’s Shadow).
The Moon eclipses the Sun and the great Shadow of the Earth
eclipses the Moon.

The stat ement that the Moon is water has proved false.

OCCURRENCE OF AN ECLIPSE
wHeaMaraeash Waraed sar afsqdteg: |
waa vated sara TET AT I B= UI

38. When at the end of a lanar month, the Moon, lying near a node
(of the Moon), enters the Sun, or, at the end of a lunar fortnight,
enters the Earth’s Shadow, it is more or less the middle of an
eclipse, (solar eclipse in the former case and lunar eclipse in
the latter case).

1. Govinda-svami, too, says the same thing. Writes he :
a4 gafegienasa qed? aearfata qa: 1 ada fe steat cahlesrt aay |
aa ua [went] afsatrratetepery | See his comm. on MBh, vi. 3.
2. See KK, I, vi. 2.

3, So. ATASST aT


--- Page 226 ---
152

GOLA SECTION { Gola Sn.

Aryabhata evidently takes the time of conjunction of the Sun

and Moon as the middle of a solar eclipse, and the time of opposition
of the Sun and Moon as the middle of a lunar eclipse. This is only —
approximately true. :

The phrase “more or less’, according to the commentators, is

indicative of the fact that, on account of parallax, the time of apparent
conjunction is not exactly the same as that of geocentric conjuction.

39.

LENGTH OF THE SHACOW
wha fare yates g vaya |
aarti Ged yTaseRraT | ge I

Multiply the distance of the Sun from the Earth by the diameter
of the Earth and divide (the product) by the difference between
the diameters of the Sun and the Earth: the result is the
length of the Shadow of the Earth (i.e. the distance of the vertex
of the Earth’s shadow) from the diameter of the Earth (i.e. from
the centre of the Earth).?

That is,

length of Earth’s Sha dow = Sun’s distance x Earth’s diameter

Sun’s diameter—Earth’s diameter

 

The Hindu method for deriving this formula, called “The lamp

and Shadow method” (pradipacchaya-karma), is as follows :

Consider the figure below. S is the centre of the sun and E that

‘of the Earth. SA and EC are drawn perpendicular to SE and denote
the semi-diameters of the Sun and the Earth, respectively. BC is parallel
to SE. V is the point where SE and AC produced meet each other.

 

Fig. 12

 

1. C.E, Ni. Sa. sratar deed
2, Gf. BrSpSi, xxiii. 8; MBh, v, 71; LBh, iv. 6,


--- Page 227 ---
Verse 40 ] EARTH'S SHADOW 153

Hindu astronomers compare SA with a lamp post, EC with
a gnomon, and EV with the shadow cast by the gnomon due to the

light of the lamp. Consequently, they call EV ‘the length of the Earth’s
shadow from the diameter of the Earth’.

The triangles CEV and ABC are similar ; therefore

EV_ BC SE .
EC | AB SA—EC

. EV= SEX EC __ SEX2EC
.* “~~ SA—EC 2SA-—2EC °

Sun's distance X Earth’s diameter
e., length of Barth’s shadow= stanc
i.e., length of Earth’s shadow Sun’s diameter—Earth’s diameter *

EARTH’S SHADOW AT THE MOON’S DISTANCE
aamahat ybreaety aq aaTaTay |
wear raed ary ana: ealacaeaT Ul vo UI
40. Multiply the difference between the length of the Earth’s shadow
and the distance of the Moon by the Earth’s diameter and divide

(the product) by the length of the Earth’s shadow ; the result is

the diameter of the Tamas (i.e¢., the diameter of the Earth’s
shadow at the Moon’s distance).®

That is
Diameter of Tamas

— (ength of Earth’s shadow— Moon's distance) X Earth’s diameter
length of Earth’s shadow |

The rationale of this formula is as follows : /
See the previous figure (Fig. 12). M is the position of the Moon
‘when it is just on the point of entering the Earth’s Shadow. MD is

perpendicular to SE; so it denotes the semi-diameter of the Earth’s
shadow at the Moon’s distance, i.e., the semi-diameter of the Tamas.

 

1. B.D. azeTeq
2. Pa. cafasara: -
3. Cf. BrSpSi, xxiii. 8-9 ; MBh, v.72; LBly iv. 7.

A. Bh, 20


--- Page 228 ---
154 GOLA: SECTION ‘L Gola Sn:

The triangles MDV and CEV are similar ; therefore

 

MD _. CE
DV EV
EV—ED) x CE
mp—(EV—ED)xCE_
or > EV — / .
EV—ED)x2CE _(EV- EM)x2 CE
or 2 MD= ( =) =| ™) approx.

i.e., Diameter of Tamas
__ (length of Earth’s shadow —Moon’s distance) x Earth’s dameter ,
length of Earth’s shadow
"approx,
HALF-DURATION OF A LUNAR ECLIPSE
¢ AN. :
aaracratraa: Uae rata’ Tre7 |
¢ 4 Ne c
fren qa’ Fa Tegra I Ye II
41. From the square of half the sum of the diameters of that (Tamas)
and the Moon, subtract the square of the Moon’s latitude, and
(then) take the square root of the difference ; the result is known
as half the duration of the eclipse (in terms of minutes of arc).
The corresponding time (in ghatis etc.) is obtained with the
help of the daily motions of the Sun and the Moon.®
That is,
Half the duration of a lunar eclipse

=./oi1—f? minutes of arc

_ 60 XK 4/2 — B?
d
where o=sum of the semi-diameters of Tamas and Moon

B= Moon’s latitude

ghatis

d=(Moon’s daily motion—Sun’s daily motion) in minutes of
arc.

ae TS

1. F, Pa. aeqatder $2:

2, Gh, So. fadaafitd ; others frataen afta |
"3, A.B. D. Ni, aftanita

4. A.D. Ni, ferad aap

5. Cf. MBh, v. 74-76 (a-b); LBA, ivy. 10-12; KK, I, iv. 4,

 


--- Page 229 ---
Verse 42 J LUNAR ECLIPSE 155

This gives only an approximate value of the semi-duration of
the eclipse. To obtain the best approximation, the process should be
iterated until the value of the semi-duration is fixed. For details, see
MBA, v. 75-76.

HALF-DURATION OF TOTALITY OF A LUNAR ECLIPSE

aegeataraaea afte aaaTATTET |
Prasad acne Bate 4 ee

_ 42. Subtract the semi-diameter of the Moon from the semi-diameter
of that Tamas and find the square of that difference. Diminish
that by the square of the (Moon’s) latitude and then take the
square root of that ; the square root (thus obtained) is half the
duration of totality of the eclipse.”

That is,
half the duration of totality= 4/5?—@? minutes of arc

= Ox e ghatis,

where s=semi-diameter of Tamas—semi-diameter of Moon
6=Moon’s latitude

d=(Moon’s daily motion—Sun’s daily motion) in minutes of
arc,

This also gives only a rough approximation. To obtain the best
approximation, the process should be iterated until the semi-duration
of totality is fixed.

THE PART OF THE MOON NOT ECLIPSED
aaa Aeneard qhrereasasarne |
PITTI A Ta HMR | Vz I!

43. Subtract the Moon’s semi-diameter from the semi-diameter
of the Tamas; then subtract whatever is obtained from the

——

 

1. F. transposes this verse to after 44.
2. Cf. PSi, x. 7; MBh, v. 16(c-d); LBh, iv. 14; KK, I, iv. 4.

3. Ni. The text in the TSS edn, adds yeetat, which is not
warranted by the Com. of Ni. Moreaver, it is metrically superfluous.


--- Page 230 ---
156 GOLA SECTION { Gola Sn.

Moon’s latitude : the result is the part of the Moon not eclipsed

(by the Tamas).'

That is,

the length of the Moon’s diameter which is not eclipsed
=Moon’s latitude—(semi-diameter of Tamas—Moon’s

semi-diameter).

It is easy to see that the obscured part of the Moon’s diameter

- (at the time of opposition of the Sun and Moon in a partial lunar

eclipse)

=} (diameter of Tamas+diameter of Moon)—Moon’s latitude,
and hence the unobscured part of the Moon’s diameter at that time

==Moon’s diameter—{}(diameter of Tamas diameter of Moon)
—Moon’s latitude}
«=Moon’s latitude—(semi-diameter of Jamas —semi-diameter of
Moon).
As stated earlier, Aryabhata I does not make any distinction
between the time of opposition and the time of the middle of the eclipse.
Hence the above rule.

MEASURE OF THE ECLIPSE AT THE GIVEN TIME
frauntate fafieenseafianyqar |
arqaraisared Meearenraat wT tt Vy ll

44. Subtract the isa from the semi.duration of the eclipse ; to (the
square of) that (difference) add the square of the Moon’s
latitude (at the given time) ; and take the square root of this
sum. Subtract that (square root) from the sum of the semi.
diameters of the Tamas and the Moon: the remainder
(thus obtained) is the measure of the eclipse at the given time.

The term ista denotes, says the commentator Stryadeva, the
Moon’s motion (in longitude) relative to Tamas corresponding to the
time elapsed at the given time, since the first contact, or to elapse at
the given time before the last contact.

Let AB be the ecliptic, the circle centred at T the Tamas
at the time of opposition of the Sun and Moon, CD the Moon’s orbit

 

1. The saine role occurs in LBh, iv. 9.
2. A.B.C, D. F. Ni. Pa. Sa, feaeraifare


--- Page 231 ---
Verse 44 ) MEASURE OF THE ECLIPSE 157

relative to the Tamas at T. Mi the position of the Moon at the time
of the first contact, and Ms the position of the Moon at the given time.
MP and M,Q are perpendiculars dropped on AB. Then

PT denotes the semi-duration of the eclipse,
PQ denotes the ista,
M,Q denotes the Moon’s latitude at the given time,

and LM denotes the eclipsed portion of the Moon’s diameter at the
given time.

 

Fig. 13
It is evident from the figure that
LM=(LT+MaM)—Mal,

where
MyT =/M.0?+ QT?

= 4/ MQ? + (PT—PQ)*.
Hence the above.

The ista is generally given in terms of time (in ghatts) elapsed
since the first contact or to elapse before the last contact, and the above
tule.is stated as follows :

“Subtract the ista (ghatis) from the ghafis of the semi-
duration of the eclipse. Multiply that by the difference between
the true daily motions of the Sun and Moon and divide by
60. Add the square of that to the square of the Moon’s lati-
tude for the given time, and take the square root (of that
sum). This subtracted from the sum of the semi-diameters

of the Tamas and the Moon gives the measure of the Moon’s
diameter eclipsed at the given time.”


--- Page 232 ---
158 GOLA SECTION { Gola Sn.

The portion sthitimadhyadistavarjitanmulam of the text is
defective as it does not convey the correct sense intended here. A
correct reading would have been vistasthityardhavargitanmulam.

ARSAVALANA

TUR AAT TAS afamarsufreatent fax |

45. (a-b) Multiply the Rversed sine of the hour angle (east or west)
by (the Rsine of) the latitude, and divide by the radius : the
result is the aksavalana. Its direction (towards the east of
the body in the afternoon and towards the west of the body
in the forenoon) is south. (In the contrary case, it is north).?

That is,

Rvers HX Rsin ¢$

aksavalana= R >

 

where H is the hour angle of the eclipsed body and ¢ the latitude
of local place:

The aksavalana is the deflection of the equator from the prime
vertical on the horizon of the eclipsed body.

The above formula is incorrect. Brahmagupta (A.D. 628)
modified it by replacing Rvers H by Rsin H.? Better and accurate
formulae were given by Bhaskara II (A.D. 1150).

The word dik in the text means valana.

The Paulifa-siddhanta summarised by Varghamihira gives the
following rule: 4 ,

_Hx¢
aksavalana=—

ee

1. The same rule occurs in PSi, xi, 2; MBh, v. 42-44; LBh,
iv. 15-16; KK, 1, iv. 7 (as interpreted by Bhattotpala) ; SMT, lunar
eclipse.

2. See BrSpSi, iv. 16.

3. See SiSi, I, v. 20-21(a-b); HH, viii, 68; and Jf, viii.
66(c-d)-67. .

4. See PSi, vi. 8.


--- Page 233 ---
Verse 45 J VALANA 159
The formula of the old Surya-siddhanta summarised by

Varahamihira is 3

Rsin HXR sin ¢ .
R :
which is the same as given by Brahmagupta.

aksavalana=

AYANAVALANA FOR THE FIRST CONTACT
fgeqalsaracatftacfratearrara cag i ey it

45. (c-d) Making use of the semi-duration of the eclipse, calculate
the longitude of the Sun or Moon (whichever is eclipsed)
for the time of the first contact. Increase that longitude
by three ‘sign? and (multiplying the Rversed sine thereof
by the Rsine of the San’s greatest declination and dividing
by the radius) calculate the Rsine of the corresponding
declination : this is the ayanavalana (or krantivalana) for
the time of the first contact.

(Its direction in the eastern side of the eclipsed body
is the same as that of the ayana of the eclipsed body ; in
the western side it is contrary to that).4

That is,

° : °
ayanavalana=—Rvers_M +99") <Rsin OF ,

where M is the longitude of the eclipsed body, the Sun or Moon.

J. See PSi, xi. 2.

2, <A.E.. transpose this verse to after 46,

3. Govindasvami writes: frafrafgafa astag aifecfretaa |
HIATT AIBA: | GeHNMETTaTgada | AA HlAATHASATIATT ETI: 1 So
also writes Paramesvara : frufrafgren WansaTaEM HleqeeasaTagT
wadiead: 1 See Govindasvami’s comm. on MBh, v. 46-47 and Parame-
évara’s supercommentary Sidhanta-dipika on. vs, 45.

4. The same rule occurs in PSi, xi. 3; MBh, v.45; KK, I,
iv. 7. Also see LBh, iv. 17 and SMT, ch. on lunar eclipse, where
M+90° is replaced by M-—-90°. KR, iii. 14(c-d)-15(a-b) gives a
mixed rule. ,


--- Page 234 ---
160 CC GOLA SECTION [ Gola Sn,

The ayanavalana is the deflection of the ecliptic from the
equator on the horizon of the eclipsed body. It is defined as above for
the first contact because in the case of a lunar eclipse in the eastern
side (which is first eclipsed) the direction of the ayanavalana is the
same as that of the Moon’s ayana. The first contact is only ‘a token ;
for the middle of the eclipse or for the last contact, it is obtained
similarly. .

The above formula for the ayanavalana is incorrect. It was
modified by Brahmagupta, who replaced Rvers (M+90°) in the formula
by Rsin (M+90°).1 An accurate expression for the ayanavalana was
given by Bhaskara IT (1150).*

The aksavalana the ayanavalana, and the viksepavalana are
required in the graphic representation of an eclipse. For the details
of graphic representation of an eclipse according to Bhaskara J, the
reader is referred to MBA, v. 46-47 and LBA, iv. 19-32.

The commentators of the Aryabhatiya are of the opinion that
the word sthityardhacca refers to the viksepavalana. “Since the
Moon’s latitude is obtained from the sthityardha’’, writes the
commentator Somegvata, ‘‘the Moon’s latitude is meant by the word
sthityardha’. So also says the commentator Parameévara : “By the
word sthityardha are meant the moon’s latitude corrected for parallax
(in the case of a solar eclipse) and the Moon’s latitude (in the case of a
lunar eclipse) which are based on that’’.

Thus, according to the interpretation of the commentators, the
verse 45 (c-d) should be translated as follows :

“With the help of the semi-duration of the eclipse,
calculate (the Moon’s latitude for the first contact,
reverse its direction in the case of a lunar eclipse, and
treat it as the vikgepa)valana.

Also calculate the longitude of the Sun or Moon (which-
ever is eclipsed) for the time of the first contact and
increase it by three signs and (multiplying the Rversed
sine thereof by the Rsiae of the Sun’s greatest decli-

A aR

1, See BrSpSi, iv. 17.
2. See SiSi, I, v. 21(c-d)-22(a-b).


--- Page 235 ---
Verse 46 J COLOUR OF ECLIPSED MOON 161

nation and dividing by the radius) calculate the Rsine of
the corresponding declination : this is the ayanayalana
(or krantivalana) for the time of the first contact.

(Its direction in the eastern half of the eclipsed body is
the same as that of the ayana of the eclipsed body ; in the
western side it is contrary to that.)”’

The word sparge in the text means ‘at the time of the first
contact’, which seems to suggest that the calculation is to be made
for the first contact. But this is not the case. ‘The time of the first
contact is only a token’’, writes the commentator Stryadeva. “The
calculation of the valana should be made for the time of the first
contact, the time of last contact, the time of the middle of the eclipse,
and for any other desired time.””

COLOUR OF THE MOON DURING ECLIPSE
TEMA YH: TISMEY UM Aaa HU: |
RAMS Hie: AHMATHAMAT | VE |

46. At the beginning and end of its eclipse, the Moon (i.c., the
obscured part of the Moon) is smoky; when half obscured,
it is black ; when (just) totally obscured, (i ¢., at immersion
or emersion), it is tawny ; when far inside the Shadow, it is
copper-coloured with blackish tinge,

In the case of a solar eclipse, the obscured part of the Sun looks
black at every phase of the eclipse.

WHEN THE SUN’S ECLIPSE IS NOT TO BE PREDICTED

aaeq ae asaheaaTN ATTATA |
araaarrand aeqagerea’ ga 1 veo I

47. When the discs of the Sun and the Moon come into contact,
a solar eclipse should not be predicted when it amounts to

1. Cf. PSi (Pauliga), vi. 9(c-d)-10.
2. Pa. gives a variant, aHeg

3. So, Weazarary

4, Ni, caseaaareg


--- Page 236 ---
1620 GOLA SECTION { Gole Sn.

one-eighth of the Sun’s diameter (or less) (as it may not
‘be ‘visible to the naked eye) on account of the brilliancy
of the Sun and the transparency of the Moon.!

PLANETS DETERMINED FROM OBSERVATION

fakeRaing Rang ctegarng warhrasegs |
gigas Fat WTAE: AT || BE I

48. The Sun has been determined from the conjuction of the Earth
and the Suo, the Moon from the conjunction of the Sun and the
Moon, and all the other planets from the conjunctions of the
planets and the Moon,

What is meant is that the revolution numbers etc. of the Sun,
Moon and the planets stated in the first chapter of the present work
have been determined by observing the conjunctions as stated above.

According to the commentator Someévara, the method of finding
the revolutions of the Sun, Moon and the planets in a yuga by
observing the conjunctions is as follows :

(1) Revolutions of the Sun

Let the number of conjunctions of the Sun and the Earth,
ie., the number of civil days (including the fraction of a civil day)
in one (sidereal) solar year be c. Then the number of revolutions
of the Sun in a yuga=C/c, where C denotes the number of civil days
in a yuga.

(2) Revolutions of the Moon

Let the number of conjunctions (including the fraction of a
conjunction) of the Sun and the moon in one solar year be c. Then the
number of revolutions of the Moon in a yuga=(c+1)S, where S
denotes the number of solar years in a yuga.

 

1. Cf. MB, v. 41.
2. Ra, satfaaeta:; So. Taree Az


--- Page 237 ---
Verse 49 =] ACKNOWLEDGEMENT TO BRAHMA 163

Alternative method. Let the number of risings of the Moon
(including the fraction also) in one solar year be m. Then the number
of revolutions of the Moon in a yuga=E—mS, where E denotes the
number of rotations of the Earth and § the number of solar years in
a yuga.

(3) Revolutions of the planets (Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and
Saturn) round the Earth

Let the number of conjunctions of a planet and the Moon
(including the fraction also) in one solar year be c. Then the number
of revolutions of the planet in a yuga—=M-—cS, where M denotes the
number of revolutions of the Moon and § the number of solar years in
a yuga.

(4) Revolutions of the Sighroccas of Mercury and Venus

Let C denote the number of civil days in a yuga, and d the
number of days (including the fraction of a day) between “two
consecutive ‘inferior or superior conjunctions of the planet and the
Sun. Then

C/d=revolution-number of the planet’s Sighrocca— revolution-
number of the Sun.

.". number of revolutions of the planet’s sighrocca in a yuga
=C/d+Sun’s revolutions in a yuga.

For other methods see Some$vara’s Commentary, in Part IL.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT TO BRAHMA

AASMARART AYLI TAT! TAA |.
asarnaata war fart eater ve Ul

49. By the grace of Brahma, the precious jewel of excellent
knowledge (of astronomy) has been brought out by me by means
of the boat of my intellect from the sea of true and false
knowledge by diving deep into it.

 

1. . All others except Bh. and So, read 24a for #aIW:


--- Page 238 ---
164 , CONCLUSION
areas arate area Bar eaEe |
THAT: AMI Hea aH qa AISeT Il ve |

50. This work, Aryabhatiya by name, is the same as the ancient
Svayambhuva (which was revealed by Syayambhi) and as such
it is true for all times. One who imitates it or finds fault with
it shall lose his good deeds and longevity.

[ fa Meat: aaa: |

reaTaraaRay Maas AAT

1, B, aafa for aar

2, Ni, amt; Pa. aad; Ra. So. fram

3. C. gearat ; F. sarge:

4. A. eff meta. oriudlt ama. Beat grearferaed:’
ugfaraferadt aero (in Mal., meaning 16,99,817 is the Kali day of
the completion of the transcription). B. geaTaaéta ary afaarafaarnta-
saeq: 1 C. No formal col. D. xeratuerarafacfadt maa: Fareed: |

E. araare: warea: ) xerdudld afeg? aaraqa =F. afe ataqe: i
MAMA TATA |


--- Page 239 ---
APPENDIX I

INDEX OF HALF.VERSES AND KEY PASSAGES

at: wateata (eta, 14c) 101
waaay wag fzataTa
(afta, 5a) 37
aaenit aif aga (rte, 9c) 119
wesafeyiraraeagy
(afore, 33 a) 74
TARE Teas
(afore, 13 d) 55
afernrretaga (afer, 33.c) 74
afasrrarrart (afra, 32a) 74
aferrast ga (eta, 6a) = 91
agednmfatten: (rita, 9a) 119
agaist (BI, 20c) 105

aga Ararq (HTH, 21 a) 106
aratgad gtd «afer

(afer, 24 c) 67
arag: are fradia

(afer, 28 d) 11
TTMVSA GH: (Ta, 3a) 114
AATAT AeA (AA, 12c) 122
AAS AaeeeAeATA A

(afera, 10 c) 45
orator gatat feafas

(ait, 30 d) 141
waive nosata (ata, 2c) 114

ermegticaat fire (ritfaet, 7b) 15

 

165

aptsfia: (ate, 37 a) 151
mesa: & ay ayzT:

(afer, 17 d) 59
ad eqqaertd (M14, 16) 127
areal ai eg Wey

(sta, 23 b) 109
aeyt ot watt ya

(ste, 22 d) 108
ad afiregri (sta, 15) 126
aatfa aarert (ate, 5c) 117

aca fg avsasea: (ate, 14 a) 101

aermsantereifar Bt EAT a:
(vtfaet, 2 b) 3

AAAS YUreat: (wT, 4d) 88

weAlAL AA (TA, 8 c) 92
weanataagarg (art, 29.c) 141
TATA goTAeTeAT (WT, 9 d)

93
araraga wea (afr, 8 a) 42

araacentter wate (strat, 1c) 1
araadta areat (att, 50 a) 164
areal gerafeorg: (afore, 10 d)45

gee aya afer (afta, 19 a) 61
geeqfuataccet (afta, 19c) 61
geesaraferd (rte, 25 a) 133
geerrmngforary (ata, 26a) 135


--- Page 240 ---
166— APPENDIX I

qearrmnat (rte, 24a) 132
gvafaet agra: (ate, 14c) 123
weatreht get (ste, 9 a) 93
sarmerrqeray (Me, 36.c) 149
saafa fe amara: (ata, 27 a) 136
ganreaaafafad (sata, 10a) 119
gat aameand (me, 35c) 148
gaql at agrat (ate, 13 a) 123
wast Hag (Ta, 19 c) 128
gafeszta aaai (wte, 13.c) 100

aeaqeracdante (mfr, 6c) 39
seqaaarg we: (We, 21 a) 129

SEMEMTAAAT: (TT, 22 a) =: 106

ua gan awd & (afta, 2a) 33

uaracerafaa: (afta, 21a) 64

warat ara (ate, 20) 128
we arafrann: (wre, 2 c) 85
garaaea afi: (te, 5c) 102

wearafanesam: (ate, 17 a) 104
wegrvesiged (aT, 18a) 105
ReuTasetata- (HT, 21c) 106
mearat gam (sta, 25.c) 110
& aeat taal We we

(sftfaart, 1 b) 1
a Xd: (after, 7b) 15
wenieat: (atfret, 12 d) 29
meartaratar mt (sitfaat, 5c) 9
erat Grater az:

(sta, 13 b) 109

 

“wTesaTATTat

(ta, 11 c) 98
mand ava (wa, 22a) 129
wel waa g (sfeet, 5 a) 9
§ fefrgersa sem (citfatet, 3b) 6
gu walang (sifrat, 3d) 6
RayeTtTeatd (Aa, 3c) 114
gfeardifng agen: (ate, 17d) 127
ggagesatad aay

(afore, 1 d) 33
gteaad a aa (afm, 2c) 33
qugaaarat: (att, 22a) «106
fafad anoeded (site, 18 c) 128
fafaargerrererat (Ma, 32 a) 144
fara eat gagrat (Ae, 34 c) 147

fafacfactira faaee

(att 48 a) «162
RafaarTeeay ATTY

(ara, 2 d) 85

areusT Met Malt HoT:
(rite, 46 b) 161
afgaad eat wa (atfaet, 2c) 3

eqnit senat (Mfrs, 6d) 13

H-G-A-S-G-A TANT:
(wifeet, 10b) 22

areRSCTT ATH feTaTA

(afer, 20 a) 63
afd etefeat tata

(tft, 1 d) 1
arate w (sitferet, 5 b) 9.

qearat eat (afta, 31.c) 73


--- Page 241 ---
INDEX OF HALF-VERSES 167

TAWA ATATAT:
(fast, 9 b) 19

fafaer gaTyTeaTeat
(aivferet, 11 d) 23

gornrar wrrge: (nfera, 28 a) 71

ge fgege (afaet, 3 c) 6 -

gefeaared ATCA aq
(wtf, 5 d) 9

gaara wifitam: (HTH, 4c) 88
deren afte: (wte, 2a) 85
afasreata Faas (fea, 30 a)
72
aarrmrafcerred (afaet, 13 c) 31
qreitaateaset (afta, 18 c) 60
watt z qa (Afra, 18a) 60

sain faraay

(afore, 7 d) 40
GAA TTAATT: EAT .

(afaa, 3 d) 35
agent at (stfaet, 8 d) 17

safis fsa gaa (aiferst, 12.c) 29

agefrs waaceqe (mf, 10 a)45
araeurerdtrea (at, 42 a) 155
aalea safes (fae, 4a) 6
aeat werasisira: (ata, 37 a) 151
aistatanta: (nia, 4a) 116

graufa met ga (Fre, 37.) 151
grargfired erara- (Fre, 16 a) 57

wrarmarataad (ie, 40 a) 153

Baga aeae (afer, 27 c) 70
Bat: Teerxeat: (aft, 27 a) 69

HT-0f-FHA-GA-HATSTTIT ATL
(sitferat, 11 c) 23
wards fansadg wits y
(71a, 23 b) 130

say weaha Heat (ste, 30.c) 141

A-IAAT-A-IS_ TAT

(sitfarst, 10 c) 22
ataita avcaet (sitfernt, 10 a) 22
fat qearay (atfret, 7a) = 15

qeagen aateree: (me, 14d) 123
avafnarantdge: (ste, 41 a) 154
aexansaratat: (afta, 12c) Sl
ada areiagr: a4 (te, 48d) 162,
ade aa BEAST:

(ara, 10 d) 95
agate aaaea: (ata, 7 c) 118
afar at (afta, 7c) 40
arneusargedl: (Aa, 33.c) 144
age qataia (afer, 25) 68
aaa: eafaenrAy (fa, 40 d) 153
aaat facaeerg (ata, 43a) 155
areragegatat: (7a, 2 a) 114
asmpearatattt 2-8-0:

(airfare, 6 b) 13
wtemadtard (Aa, 1 c) 113
faufgaat waa o ATaey .

(wre, 1 b) 85


--- Page 242 ---
168 APPENDIX I

faqsuer wares (afora, 6a) 38
faqs a agest a werfeary
(fora, 13 b) 55
saternt fraferzeat: (wre, 10c) 95
azifeaweraia (afta, 26a) 68

auatfragatray (fret, 13 a) 31
faageatatrem (ita, 8c) 118
fast adage (1a, 8 a) 92
fasta an:afeia (mte, 12) 100
qraravsaafa (ata, 21c) 129
Hates (TA, 23a) «130
qa-gaattefafaniacer

(aa, 34 a) 146
qEnrect verfinge (site, 21 b)129
dar: oeafer aitedy

(ata, 16 a) 127
Reeq aferq aq 2

(ata, 20 d) 128
at-afe-at-gar-gea-faca

arateay (atfret, 9d) 19

frafagona dantg (afera, 24a) 67
faatrarerracitaect (afta, 31d) 73

waaay Ney (Ata, 1c) 121
ATH TAGS FT Aeasy
(sit, 12 b) 122
vafergqeaiied: (tt, 4c) 116
Fred sage erga ferca:
(ata, 10 b) 119
afe ata (atfret, 7 a) 15

aearaeasitat (ma, 30a) 141
afea; wgereat (mfr, 9c) 44

 

areadrmeted (site, 22 c) 129
frst atangfod (att, 7c) 92
qaiqcfaten- (ima, 20 a) 128
qaieefararst (ma, 19 a) 128
qaivenaned (ata, 18 a) 128
TIBIA A: (TA, 46 a) 161.
sforredentas (aitfaest, 1 a) 1
afrreaafrat (ate, 19 a) 105
sfewoscrer wed (mre, 18 c) 105
sactt tq wteiteara
(ara, 17 d) 104
srarearqsateatg (afta, 12 a) 51
wenteararareat (‘iet, 27 c) 136
TaST agar farce: (Ma, 10 b)119
saved axa Gel aasaTa:
(afr, 9b) 43
area eat fare
(aa, 21d) 129
sietdfa wert ay: (aifaeT, 6c) 13

% & wonevar: (sifte, 12d) 29
wt @ aqucaed dari:
(afeta, 3 b) 34

TeqaRTT a-a-T-0-g
_— (sftfitet, 9 a) 19
ga gyfer (atfrat, 4 b) 6

qaQuaHtanes a Say
(aitfret, 4 d) 6

gfara oefaetar (itfret, 4c) 6
werguirqerqazfa- (afta, 1 a) 33
wafewea qe: (FitH, 8a) 118


--- Page 243 ---
INDEX OF HALF-VERSES 169

arent feat aegarara
(rat, 8 d) 92
waa facitafaat (afore, 31 2) 73
wrt gagata (ara, 3 a) 86
WISAT: AWA sak
(ata, 10d) 119

watitsa: (atfent, 6 d) 13
wiTgTed wafia qo:
(afta, 28 b) 71

wri Rraniftaed (afta, 4a) 36
WTAE: WieAT (TH, 15 a) 102
wrat aalaateanat (ate, 18 d) 128
wriaigemand (7,47 ¢) 161
wrest agin: (itfrw, 8a) 17
waatranfe arerat: (wre, 5d) 91
Wie: adtat ge: (ae, 6d) 118
quested wasat sea

(*tfret, 13 b) 31
wert steneifs (ate, 5 a) 117
qraraan fawad (ae, 40c) 153
Wear (wa, 39 c) 152
qearat sara (te, 38 c) 151

Wareayfaat sarered-
(TH, 25a) 110
afeadtaifeaferea:
(sta, 6d) 91

qefafaere fawitg (stm, 39 2) 152
Werranits gel (aa, 15 a) 126
HEIEqaafaeten: (aitlere, 7c) 15
Wy saftag (etfaet, 4 b) 6
Wry @ (mfirar, 8 d) 17
qagaate: (fre, 3d) 4g
&, Bh, 24

afer afta fer (sitive, 12 a) 29
wrETHETHATATy (FTA, 13 a) 100
Hferqrrmra? ferry
(afi, 32d) 74
weawmauailat- (a, 33 a) 144
aeaTAaTATTFAT (Mt, 32c) 144
aeaTal aagleni (ate, 13 c) 123
HeITAPRATMAY (ate, 45 a) 158
wed BTA YWAT (HTT, 9c) 93
agg: gat a (aw, 5b) 9
AGA: va (sitferet, 5 a) 9
Aa F-G-3-F-z1
(ritfaet, 11 a) 23
Weateareel Tea
(aTH, 23 a) 109
Healeata PETMETT: (HIE, 23 c) 109
wWealsaregetd (wT, 17c) 104

ARVANA Marat

(™1a, 13 d) 100
wela agrara creat sar:

(ata, 14 b) 101

Frat gaat (afr, 25 a) 68
qe fagorad (afta, 20) 63
araratafeagaat (ata, 6 c) 118
az 4: (ma, 37 b) 151
Heltget aereqeat (are, 15 d) 102
Sreatarara: (site, 11 a) 121
ara: seared (ata, 1 a) 113

a: ata: Asta (afta, 28 c) 71

a: witstafa: eirearg
(sre, 20 a) 105


--- Page 244 ---
170 , APPENDIX 1

aaeg wacadg (af, 23 c) 67
wera amiga (afr, 14c) 55
ugenaraqeruba: (nite, 7a) 118
cages at grat (afera, 15.c) 57
‘aaa qarat: (mfra, 17a) 59
grefranorr: gq (efter, 3 a) 6
graderafaaat: (eta, lla) 98

efavmrert cousat: (Hta, 5a) 91
cfagata feat: (ete, 5c) 91
cfanrdedtsfirateg 8 ata:

(erat, 6 b) 91
vfaad arged (ata, 7 a) 92
faaaiel at: (ra, 17a) 127
efanferrtarm: (RTH, 3c) 86
cfanfiedter wife atfararar:

(ste, 5 b) 91

eategaiarg sariaarag:
(ata, 48 b) 162
eee trege (afta, 29a) 71
Tasfaaasdta CAT
(ata, 13 d) 123
agreasicann (ate, 10.) 119
wgtased: (ata, 25d) 133
wad afrerged (afr, 30c) 72
wed Taafad (aft, 26c) 68
Ped EATATAT FAT
(nfo, 4d) 36
afeort free st aga a
. (aitferet, 11 b) 23
wits weregea: (titre, 3 a) 34

aifafaat: a wae

(afita, 22 c) 65
wifeagagfora: (afta, 5c) 37
arifarerfig at (aitferet, 2 a) 3
ant amt ya (afta, 4 c) 36
wisad warcaad at (mfret 2 d) 3
ad gram atar: (sta, 1 a) 85
factagfafadta (ata, 42) 155
fastrqorereat (ata, 35a) 148
fadtoatafgata (ma, 44a) 156
fadtaresta (ata, 43 c) 155
fatarrsayat- (ara, 36a) 149
fagavsitararqer (ate, 23.c) 130
fagasshargira: (rita, 29 a) 141
fagassaar farret (ttt, 31 c) 142
fagagarafeama: (tea, 24c) 132 -
facpeerdfaaaa (met, 28c) 139
faesrerda at geat (afea, 9 d)44
faereaimedget (afta, 8c) 42
qaafeat weredt (TA, 19 c) 105
TARISHTASY (ata, 6 a) 118
aa aa ated (afta, 13.a) 55
qa wwdatisdsara:
(afer, 17 c) 59
aaa ata ga (afra, 29) 71.

VEHTT MEH TMITAe

("fera, 15 a) 57
wEgyT stat at (afta, 16 c) 57
mgt: varoread (afore, 14 a) 56
afa-38-ga G-e-a0F

(sitferet, 8 c) 17:


--- Page 245 ---
INDEX OF HALF.VERSES VW

mifr-e-ga-wyy-gerewait stra:

(sitferet, 10 d) 22
afagegag ararq

(ste, 22 c) 108

wit cefaca (stfrm, 3 c) 6
afe-s-a-o-ratT BT:

(attferst, 7 d) 15
ufa aafifzsqea |

(sitfarst, 3 a) 6
nferarcragatrra (Met, 48 c) 162
wfafacet fastar: (att, 6c) 91
afertry (aitferet, 10 b) 22

wisi aged a yearat

(at#, 37 d) 151
afararatd frac: afer:
(ait, 17 c) -127

ufirerracs ae (frat, 6a) 13

ufafaatdts wrest wre
(aitfaet, 8 b) 17

Morwareagat: (tH, 16 c) 103

aitena sferettniiy aerriit

(BTe, 21 b) 106
sitsiteared eqzt Fat:

(ata, 23 d) 109
stettearaata (ta, 24a) = 110
wisteanft gagat

(ate, 3 d) 114
Raacerewad (afeta, 32) 74

Hacarcafetet we:
(ate, 44 d) 156

agae: @ fafa:

(afira, 21 c) 64
qfecatgat fewa: (sta, 1c) 85
afseea faatfset aret

(ere, 1 d) 85
aezusarat afer: (wa, 10a} 95
werat quicarat (wre, 12a) 100
THOTT SETA TET

(ata, 46 d) 161

avararaarera (att, 49 c) 163
aaavarragant (rita, 49 a) 163
aquaadait (nfo, 3 c) 35
aaa gta: (era, 16a) 103
aaarreatatia (afera, 11) 45

| aaTeTHS Ta aT:

(wferer, 6 b) 38
ancfcrgeatad (afta, 7 a) 40
aaaaafefaara (aft, 1a) 45

eareerat: (sitferet, 7 d) 15
aa MARIE TAY:

(era, 11b) 498
ae WAR CHIT

(wre, 12 d) 100

araner fg ante (afore, 23 a) 67
arqpiatemed (itt, 44) 156
@ arfa fweat Te wer

(atfaet, 13d) 3
adm afte: (aa, 46c) =: 161
aaat aaret (afta, 9 a) 43


--- Page 246 ---
172 APPENDIX I

afeqeiat eat

(sitfrwt, 9c) 19
areat ser aay: (af, 13 c) 55
ar fagasaitat 2a

_ (ave, 31a) 142
qEarger: score (ate 50 c) 164
+ qaifiegeearfs dteara
(site, 5d) 117
qaegufcfaatt (ate, 47a) 161
aeaneguarit (afer, 22a) 65
TaEYa age AT
(afar, 8 d) 17
earmaAeaTeTSy (Aa, 14 a) 123
CATAL EAT TAT CATT
(afore, 2 d) 33
feacadaed get (mH, 41c) 154

 

fearaatwarnat: (ate, 45.c) 159

eqeredt g yygut
(ata, 24 c) 110

eeeuferarara (ae, 38a) 151

eaqrifa: gaara (ste, 34 b) 146
wate caer (sta, 12a) = 122
eqqaned wet Wea:
(eta, 21 d) 106
waaay AT fren
(ater, 50b) 164
eargrratdga (att, 25) 133
earatera faafersrt (ata, 26.c) 135
earertiaceeat (Tt, 28 a) 139
CAAT: TANTT:
(ata, 4 a) 87


--- Page 247 ---
APPENDIX Ill

INDEX.GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL TERMS
USED BY ARYABHATA

[ Note : In each reference, the initial figures 1, 2, 3 and 4
refer, respectively, to the Gitika, Ganita, Kalakriya and
Gola padas and the further figures to verse numbers in the

respective padas, |

aa (=rt) (1, degree) 1.6;
3.14; (2. part), 4.14

aed (1. latitude), 4.19; (2. Latitude-
triangle), 4.23

aasat (Rsine latitude), 4.26, 35

aq (1. tip or end), 4,19; (2. resi-
due or remainder), 2.32, 33

aut (amplitude at rising or the
Rsine thereof), 4.30

wurde (residue-difference), 4.32

waa (non-cube), 2.5

weyet (unit of length, 1/24th
of a cubit), 1.8

wm (sign of Aries), 4.25

afireta (greater remainder) 2.32,
33

afarraartart (divisor correspon-

ding to greater remainder),
4,32, 33

afaatas (—=aferara), (intercalary
month), 3.6

wararayet (eclipse not to be
predicted), 4.47

agate (direct or anticlockwise),
3.17, 20, 21

aqedtat (having direct motion),
3.21

ageiranfa (having direct motion),
3.20; 4.9

agetafzac (distance between two

planets in direct motion),
2.31

arat (difference between two
quantities), 2.24

aremaa (last term in a series),
2.19

aren (1, greatest declination),
1.8 ; (2. declination), 4.24,
26

araq (subtractive), 2.28

aqaes (—aTaTAVTe) (ecliptic),
1.8; 4.1, 2,3

aqaer (anticlockwise), 4.16

aqatait (a designation of the
second half of the yuga),
3.9


--- Page 248 ---
174. APPENDIX IT

wema (multiplication), 2.9

waq (northward or southward
motion of a planet), 4.36

aetat (Sun’s amplitude at rising,
or the Rsine thereof), 4.30

aetay (sunrise), 1.4

agar (=a), (Rsine), 2.17

waa, (= 10°), 2.2

aa (not belonging to the varga-s
which as ka-varga, ca-varga
etc), 1.2

ayeye (month of A’vina), 3.4 .

ueaaa (setting, diurnal or helia-
cal), 4.13

wermaaagqa (rising-setting line),
4.29

aercatdfacsra ( day-radius ),
4.24, 25

‘arfa or anfaea (first term), 2.19,
20

arara (length or breadth), 2.8

arataata (Trapezium), 2.8

areit (sidereal), 3.2

araea (approximate), 2.10

FEB, see TSHTLTAT

FeSlHet (fruit corresponding to
icch@), 2.26

geqraft (requisition, one of the
three quantities in the rule
of three), 2.26

wgtta (ascending node of the
Moon), 4.2

ez (desired or given number),
2.19

wea (mandocca or Sighrocca),
1.4; 3.4, 20

seattaaftad ( anomalistic or
synodic revolutions), 3.4

seadtage (epicycle), 3.19

aeatet = (City of Ufjjayini,
modern Ujjain in Madhya
Bharat), 4.14

wewAT (BTA) (Rversed sine),
4.36

sat (common difference), 2.19,
20

waraa (gaeay), (Sun’s north-
ward journey from winter
solstice to summer solstice),

. 4.36

geafavit (a designation of the
first half of the Yuga), 3.9

saasitar (saavat) (Rsine ampli-
tude of the rising poiat of
the ecliptic), 4.33.

waaredaa (heliacal rising and
setting), 4.10

gam (degrees of altitude),
4,32 .

weaves (equatorial horizon), 4.19

wafafat (a series in general), 2.21
wam-3a oor Carma = (divisor

corresponding to smaller
remainder), 2.32, 33

HeaTM (altitude or vertical side),
2.6


--- Page 249 ---
INDEX OF TECHNICAL TERMS 175

24 (negative or minus quantity),
3,22

weat (orbit), 3.14

wearacssa (mean orbit, deferent
or concentric), 3. 17, 18, 21

weat (sign Virgo), 4.1

wata (hemisphere), 4.23

wo (hypotenuse, lateral side),
2.13.17 ; 3.25

wert (minute of arc), 1.6 ; 3.14

wereeat: (the 24 Rsine-differences
in terms of minutes), 1.12

era (a period of 1008 yugas),
1.5

sta (time in problems of princi-
pal and interest), 2.25

wrafeat (computations using
divisions of time ), 1.1

wtafauct (division of time), 3.2

wig (a day of Brahma known as
kalpa), 1.5

weary (terrestrial wind), 1.11

gfa (square), 2.24

wif, #¥et (1. vertical side of
a right-angled triangle ),
2,16; (2. complement of
the bhuja), 2.17; (3. crore),
2,2

ste (Saturn), 2.1

watad (rotations of the Earth),
3.5 oF

wa (minus, decrease, negative),
3.22 a

 

ferfasarat (Earth’s shadow), 4.2

fafa (horizon), 4.18, 19, 28,
30, 32

fafast (—fafasar) (carthsine),
, 4.26

a (Bhagola, sphere of asterisms),
3.11

aafaatt ( division of space ),
3.2

aawe (area), 2.8

@q (1. additive quantity) 2.28 ;
(2. celestial latitude), see
under fasta

@ (sky), 3.15; 4.6, 20
ala (sphere of the sky), 4.20
q@zagen (partial eclipse), 4.46

waeq (middle of the sky), 3.15 ;
4.6

weg (number of terms), 2. 20,
21, 22

afar (mathematics), 1.1

afa (motion), 2.31

waa (motion-difference), 2.31
grate (multiplier), 2.27, 28
Yaeat (long syllable) 3.2

yas (Jovian year), 3.4

gfevet (a thing of unknown value),
2.30

mitt (1. circle’;
sphere; 3. sphere), 1.1 ; 4.5

tira (art), (automatic Sphere,
model of the Bhagola), 4,22

2. celestial


--- Page 250 ---
1760 APPENDIX It

w@ (planet), 1.13; 3.8, 17, 20,
21, 23, 25

wem (eclipse), 4.37 ff.

geraca (middle of the eclipse),

4.38
ava (1. measure of eclipse),
4.35; (2. erosion by over-

lapping), 2.18

wa (1. cube of a number ),
2. 3; (2. solid cube), 2.5

gant (solid sphere), 2.7

gatas (volume of a_ solid
sphere), 2.7

wafafaaa (sum of the series of
cubes of natural numbers),
2.22

Base (volume), 2.7

eaqaed (Earth’s centre), 3.18

wage (cube root), 2.5

ws (circle), 1.6 ; 4.2

aqes (quadrilateral), 2.3

‘agua (quadrilateral), 2.11, 13

‘are (lunar), 3.6

@eateq (Moon’s apogee), 1.4

axaaq (ascensional difference),
4,27

areata (lunar month), 3.6

aq (arc), 2.11

arasard (va), 2.12

fafa (sum of a. series of natural
numbers), 2.21

fafirat (sum of a series ¥3n),
221, 22°

fafert (square of the sum of a
series of natural numbers),
2.22

grat (shadow) ; 2. 14, 15, 16;
4.5, 37, 38, 39, 40

grardtder (length of the Earth’s
shadow), 4.39

%a (denominator), 2.27

sitat (Rsine), 4.23

ae (sign Libra), 4.1

wat (Rsine), 1.12; 2.9

wad (=a, Rsine), 1.12; 2.11,
12

wa (1. Section of Earth’s shadow-
cone at the Moon’s dis-
tance), 4.42; (2. Earth’s
Shadow), 4.37

aatat (section of Earth’s shadow-
cone at Moon’s distance),
4.42.

aatfteara (diameter of Shadow,
e., diameter of the Earth’s
shadow cone at Moon’s
distance), 4.40, 43

arerag (Star planets, i.e., the

planets Mars, Mercury,
Jupiter, Venus and Saturn),
4.2

fafa (lunar day), 3.6

fafanaa (=27aM, ie., omitted
tithi), 3.6

gam (sign Libra), 4.1

iF fag (triangle), 2.6, 11, 13


--- Page 251 ---
INDEX OF TECHNICAL TERMS 177

aerfire (rule of three), 2.26

afattraa (Sun’s southward motion
from summer solstice to
winter solstice), 4.36

we (half), 2.24

fas (=aerraa), (deflection due
to latitude), 4.45

faa (= feaa, day), 4.8
fata (lord of the day), 3.16
fara (—faa, day), 3.1, 5
- fasvad (divine year, equal to 360
years of men), 3.7, 8

gerat (designation of the first
and the last quarters of a

yuga), 3.9
FANe (ecliptic-zenith distance or
its Rsine), 4.33

qeatqavee (vertical circle through
the central-ecliptic point),
4,21

wren (parallax), 4.34

gfe (arc of the ecliptic between
the Sun or Moon and the
central ecliptic point or its
Rsine), 4.34

qmfa(sat) (Rsine of drggati),
4.34

amie (visible celestial sphere),
4.23

| gee (vertical circle), 4,21

A. Bh. 23

 

aramfiy ( twelve-edged solid,
particularly a cube), 2.3

fretarq (a number which yields
the given remainders when
divided by the two given
divisors), 2.32=33

aa (additive, positive) ; (sum),
2.19 ; 2.3, 6; 3.22, 23, 24
wg (arc), 2.17

aaamt (=aaT) (revolutions-
number), 3.3

wasaT (Rsine of zenith distance),

- 4.32

aaararat (—=Aasat) (Rsine of
zenith distance), 4.32

av# (hell, south pole), 4.12

atatafawa (sidereal day), 3.5

at (a unit of linear measure
equal to four cubits), 1.8

atata (sidereal), 3.5

faga (= 10°), 2.2

facatra (exact), 2.7

arat (atfsat, afest), 3.1

afta (perigee or perihelion), 3.4

qa (1. square root) ; (2. quad-
rant of a circle), 1.11 ;
(3. term of a series), 2,19,
21, 22, 29

araraem (greatest declination ;

obliquity of the ecliptic),
4,30


--- Page 252 ---
18 APPENDIX II

qearreasitat (°sat) (Rsine of the
greatest declination), 4.30

coreg (qtameg) (Rsine of
greatest altitude, i.e., Rsine
of meridian altitude), 4.32

afentg (periphery, circumference),

2.7, 10
afefia (circumference), 2.9, 11
aftad (revolution), 3.4

ara (ascending node), 2.4, 9; 4.
2,3

arya (lateral or adjacent side),
2.8, 9

fagati (year of the manes), 3.7

gatat (east-west), 4.31

sgt (first contact in an eclipse),
4.46

gfanesat (eccentric circle of a
planet), 3.17, 18, 19

sfaeia (retrograde, clockwise),
3.17, 20, 21

srt (argument in the rule of
three), 2.26

sgt (=10°), 2.2

wagara (provector wind), 4.10

sivaa (=F) (rising point of
the ecliptic), 4.21

srvsareres (right ascension), 4.25

stmt (a unit of time equal to
four sidereal

one-sixth of a vinadika),
1.6; 3.2

seconds or

wat (interest on
2.25

warifr (fruit, one of the three
quantities in the rule of
three), 2-26

principal),

avarqa (south pole), 4.12, 16
agifeaa (a day of Brahma, a
Kalpa), 3.8

a (=aan) (asterism), 1. 65,
3. 11 ; 4.9, 15

wrt (revolutions, number of
revolutions performed by a
planet in a yuga), 1.3;
3.2, 3, 4

wits (sphere of asterisms, with
its centre at the Harth’s
centre), 4,15, 16, 23

wqsazt (am), (circle of the
asterisms), 4.10

wafeag (circumference of the
circle of asterisms), 3.12

wrt (degree),. 4.32

amet (division), 2.4

magre (WUE), (divisor), 2. 27,
28, 32

qat (= qR) (lateral side of a
right angled triangle) , 2.15,
16, 17

wie (sphere of the Earth), 4.6,
7,8

atta faenra (diameter of the
Earth), 4.39, 40

) qegrat (Earth’s shadow), 4. 38,

39, 40


--- Page 253 ---
INDEX OF TECHNICAL TERMS 179

afar (terrestrial day, or civil
day), 3.6
Wit (motion, daily motion), 4.41

vat (compasses), 2.13

asga (circle, revolution), 3.13,
14,17; 4.1, 8

afa (optional number), 2.32

wea (1. centre, middle) 3.9, 15,
18,21; (2. mean), 3. 21 ;
(3. middle term in a series),
2.19

weaug (mean planet), 3.21

aeagat (meridian sine, £e.. Rsine
of the zenith distance of the
meridian ecliptic point),
4.33

weueRe (or eGENET) (true-mean
position of a planet), 3.
23, 24

aq (a period of time equal to 72
yugas), 1.5

aq (slow, apex of slow motion,
apogee), 1.5

arama (hypotenuse associated
with mandocca), 3.25

wage (manda epicycle), 1. 10,
11; 3.21

writeq (apogee or aphelion),
1.9 ; 3.17, 22, 23

arquaad (year of men), 3.7

ara (month), 3.1

witt (sign Pisces), 4,1

 

gw (first term in a series),
2.19

qa (1. square root), 2.4, 24;
(2. principal), 2.25

qernat (interest), 2.25

#4 (mountain at north pole),
1.7; 4.11, 12, 16

¥q (sign Aries), 4.1

ga (a period of 43,20,000 years),
1.3, 5 ; 3.3, 6, 8

arate (quarter puga), 2.10

at (conjunction of two planets),
3.3

deat (a unit of linear measure
equal to 8000X4 cubits),
1.6, 7

zfanta (solar month), 3.6

vfaad (<easa, qaiza) (solar year),
3.5, 7, 12

zifit (1. sign), 3.14; (2. quan-

tity), 2.29; (3. twelve),
3.4

eq (one), 2.20
eam (a coin), 2.30

weet (a hypothetical city on the
equator where the meridian
of Ujjain intersects it), 1.4;
4.9, 10, 13, 14

wearer (times of rising of the
signs at Lanka, i.e., right
ascensions of the signs),
4.25

agelranrsatens (right ascen-
sion), 4.25


--- Page 254 ---
180

arae (1. plumb), 2.13; (2.
Roosine of latitude), 4. 26,
29, 30, 35

afs (a planet in retrograde
motion), 1.1
at (1. square), 2.3, 4, 5, 14, 22;
, (2. odd places indicated
by letters of the vargas
viz, ka-varga,
etc.), 1.2

ca-varga

wifafaaa (sum of a series of
squares of natural numbers),
2.22

wiqe (square root), 2.4, 14

wd (year), 3.1

fasta (celestial latitude), 1.8 ;

4,35, 42, 43, 44

feafse (frafeet), (one-sixtieth
of a ghatika), 3.1,2

fanate (half-duration of the
totality of an eclipse), 4,42

fasta (retrograde), 1.4

facttafaere (difference of two
planets, one direct and the
other retrograde), 2.31

fewe (difference), 2.31

fatra (difference), 2.15, 20; 4.33,
34, 39

fagaseftet (= aavat), (Rsine of
latitude), 4.29, 31

fagaa (equator), 4.24

facwrn (diameter), 2.7, 9, 11;
4.40

APPENDIX II

faceted (semi-diameter, radius),
2.7, 9, 11, 14

faeaz (—faeme), (length), 2.8

qa (1. circle), 2, 10, 11, 13, 17;
(2. epicycle), 3.19, 20, 21

qeafeng (circumference of a
circle), 2.10

qerua (area of a circle), 2.7

qaafefir (circumference of a
circle), 3.19

aa (=10°), 2.2

a4 (velocity), 3.25

saatttra, 3.3

sara (diameter), 1.7

sara (semi-diameter, radius),
3.19, 25 ; 4.24

UES (gnomon), 2.14, 15; 4.28,
29, 31

wewra (distance of the planet's
projection on the plane of
the horizon from the rising-
setting line), 4.29 -

wz (arrow, Rversed sine), 2. 17,
18 :

afafeera (lunar day), 3.6

wferata (lunar month), 3.5

wise (sighra epicycle), 1. 10,
11 ; 3.21

aiteitea, (fighrocca), 3.17, 22, 23,
24; 4.3

qafet (a solid with six edges, a
triangular pyramid), 2.6 -


--- Page 255 ---
INDEX OF TECHNICAL TERMS 181

dai (multiplication), 2.3, 6, 17,
22, 23; 3.25

waaqest (square), 2.3

waTaerfe (altitude of a triangle),
2.6

eaafcong (circumference of a
circle), 2.7

eae (circle), 2.11

eat: (year), 1.28

avrg (sum), 2.23

aramid (half the sum of the

diameters of the eclipsed
and eclipsing bodies), 4.44

aetrant (arrows of intercepted
arcs), 2.18

wer (clockwise), 4.16

eawra (total eclipse), 4.46

"emia (sum of a series), 2.29

waver (reduction to common
denominator), 2.27

gat (designation of the second
nd third quarters of a
yuga), 3.9

quite (solar year), 3.12

az (solar), 1.3

feaend (half the duration of an
eclipse), 4.41, 44

ea (first contact of an eclipse),
4.45

TEE(We) (true planet), 3.23

wyenea, seaege ( true-mean
planet), 3.23, 24

exaratet ( perpendicular drawn
on the base or the face of
a trapezium from the point
of intersection of the dia-
gonals), 2.8

gea (cubit, measure of length),
1.8 ,

Bite (lord of the hour), 3.16


--- Page 256 ---
APPENDIX It

SUBJECT INDEX

[ Note :—-The numbers refer to the relevant pages. ]

A.P. Series, —mentioned in Vedic
. texts, 63 ; —-number of terms
in, 63-64 ; —sum of different
types of series, 64-66 ; —sum
or partial sum, 61-63
abadha (segment of the base by
the altitude), 39

Abhidharmakoéa, on the Meru, 121n
Ahordtra-vrtta (day-circle),—radius
of, 132-33 Lo
Aksa-drkkarma of the Moon, 148-

. 49

Aksa-ksetra (latitude triangle), 130-
32, 135, 140-43

Aksavalana, 158-59, 160

Almagest of Ptolemy, Tr., 18n, 21n,

120n

Amsa (bhaga), (degree), —measure
of, 86, 116

angula, unit of length, 19

Anomalistic quadrants, beginnings
of, 24-25

Apasarpini, 92-93, 94

Aphelia : See under Apogees.

Apogees of planets, 19-22, 87 ;
—motion of, 20-21

Ardharatrtka (midnight) system of
Aryabhata I, 151

Area of, —a circle, 40 ; —a plane
figure, 42-44; —a_ trapezium,
42-43 ; —a triangle, 38-39

Arithmetic progression : See under
A.P. Series.

Arkagra, 141ff.

Arkagrahana : See under Solar
eclipse.

Armillary sphere,
113, 129-30
Aryabhata I,—date of birth, 95 ;

—epoch of, bija corrections
therefrom, 95-96 ; ——midnight
system of, 151; —named as
the author in the text, 1, 33.
For his views expressed in the
Aryabhatiya, see under the rele-
vant subjects in this Index.
Aryabhata I, on : —latitude-tri-
angles, 131; —modified Rsine-

(gola-yantra),

difference, 30; — volume of a

sphere, 42. See also Maha-
siddhanta.

Aryabhatiya, stated to be the title
of the work in the text itself,
164

182


--- Page 257 ---
SUBJECT INDEX . 183

Aryabhatiya-vyakhya by the differ-
ent commentators : See under
the respective commentators.

Ascending nodes of planets, 19-22 ;
—motion on the
20-21, 114

ecliptic,

Ascensional difference (carardha),
136 ff.

Asterisms, —orbit of, 13, 14, 15;
— position in relation to the
Planets, 102-3

Astronomy, I. The solar system, by
H.N. Russell etc,, 18n

Audayika-tantra (== Aryabhatiya),
28

Automatic sphere (Gola-yantra),
129-30

Avarga letters denoting numbers,
3, 4,5

Avarga places for numbers, 3, 4, 5

Avanti (Ujjayini) See under
Ujjayini.

Ayama-ksetra (trapezium), area of,
42-43

Ayana-drkkarma for the
149-51

Ayana-valana, 159-61

Moon,

Babuaji Misra, 7n, 200

Badavamukha, located at the south
pole, 122-23

Baker, Robert H., on ‘northern
lights, or aurora’ vis a vis the
Meru mountain, 122

 

 

Bakhshali manuscript, on
Series, 63 ;
travellers, 73n

: —A.P,
—problems on

Baladeva Misra, takes Kali 3600 as
the time of composition of the
Aryabhatiya, 98

Baudhayana-sulbasntra, on square

of hypotenuse, (Pythagoras’
theorem), 59

Bhaga (=arhnéa) (degree), measure
of, 86

Bhagavata-Purana, on the com-
mencement of Kaliyuga, 10n

Bhagola (sphere of asterisms)—.
motion of, as seen from the
poles, 127;—nature of and com-
putations based on, 113-27;
— principal circles of, 113 ; —
visible and invisible portions at
any place, 126 .

Bharata (battle), denoting the com-
mencement of Kaliyuga, 9, 10

Bhaskara I, on : —A, iii,5, 91;
—A, iv.l, 114; —A.P. Series,
(A, ii.19), 62-63; —aksavalana,
160 ; —apogees, revolution-
numbers of, 21-22; —area of
plane figures (A, ii. 9), 43-44; _
—area of a triangle (A, ii.6),
39 ; —beginning of Kali, 10;
— Brahman, 2 ; —composition
of A, 33 ; —cube and cubing,
35-36 ; —daily motion of
planets, 106; — drkksepa, 147;
— ghanacltighana, 66-67 ; —


--- Page 258 ---
184

gnomon, 56 ;—gulika (4, ii.30),
73 ; — identification of the ten
gitikas, 31 ; —kutjakara, 77;
~—kuvdyu, 28; —reads kvavarta
for bhavarta in A, iii.5, 91 ; —
location of Ujjayini, 124; —
manda and Sighra epicycles,
24-26 ; —-measuring of time,
99 ; ——Meru mountain, 121 ;
—motion of ascending nodes
and apogees, 21; —nr (na),
16; —reading of A, i.13, 32;
—-Rsines, 45-51 ; —sankalana
(sum of a series), 64 ; —squar-
ing (A, ii. 3), 34-35 ; —Sun’s
prime vertical altitude, 143 ;—
testing of level ground (A,
ii.13), 55; —triangles, 4, ii.6,
55 ; —viksepavalana, 160 ; —
volume of a sphere, 41; —
the word utkramana in A, iv.36,
150-51 ; —writing down of
numbers, 5

Bhaskara II, on: -—aksavalana,

158 ; —ayanavalana, 160; —
latitude triangles, 131 ; —
location of Ujjayini, 124; —
motion of the moon and the
planets, 115 ; —Rsine diffe-
rences, 30; —Sighrocca of
Mercury and Venus, 115; —
volume of the sphere, 42. See
also Bijaganita, Lilavati, Sid-
dhanta-sromari.

Bhatabda, 98
Bhattotpala, 20n, 34n, 89n ; ——on

akgavalana, 158n

 

APPENDIX Ill

Bhoja, 98 .
Bijaganita (BBi) of Bhaskara I,
72n. See also Bhaskara II.

Brahma(n), 1, 2

Brahma, God, originator of the
science of astronomy, 1, 2, 33,
163, 164 ; — day of, 9, 118

Brahmadeva, author of Karana-
prakasa, 98

Brahmagupta, on : —akgavalana,
158-59 ; —ayanavalana, 160; —
location of Ujjayini, 124-26 ;
—volume of a pyramid, 40;
——wrong reading of A, i.11, 28

Brahmagupta’s criticism of Arya-
bhataI on: A, iii.16, 103-4 ;—
beginning of Kaliyuga, 11-12;
—dregatijya, 146; —Earth’s
revolution, 15; —Earth’s ro-
tation, 119 ; —parallax, 145;
—Sighra epicycles, 27-28 ; —
Sun’s prime vertical altitude,
143.

Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta (BrSpSv),
lin, 15n, 27-28, 34-35n, 37n,
39n, 40, 41, 55n, 57-58n, 60-
6in, 63-65n, 67-68n, 70-72n,
74n, 79n, 99-100n, 103-106n,
113-16n, 118n, 124n, 128n,
143n, 145-46n, 149n, 152-53n,
158n, 1600. See also Brahma-
gupta.

Brhaddevata, on A.P, Series, 63

Brhat-jataka (BrJa), of Varaha-
mihira, 34n, See also Var&ha-
tnihira.


--- Page 259 ---
SUBJECT INDzX

Brhat-ksetra-samasa, 60n

Brhat-samhita (BrSam), of Varaha-
mihira, 89n. See also Varaiha-
mihira.

Burgess, E., 16n, 20n, 21n, 30n

Candrocca (Moon’s apogee) : See
under Moon.

Carardha (ascensional difference),
135ff,

Cardinal cities, 123

Catesby, R., 24n

Chatterjee, Bina, 7n, 20n

Chord of one-sixth circle (60°),
44-45

Circle (vrtta), — area of, 40; —
arrows of intercepted arcs of
inter-secting circles, 60-61; —
chord of one-sixth-circle (i.e.,
60°), 44-45 ; —circumference-
diameter 45 ; — con-
struction of, 55 ; —divisions
of, 85-86; — eccentric, designed

ratio,

for the explanation of planetary
motion, 104 ff; —-square on
half-chord, theorem on, 59-60

Circumference-diameter ratio, 45

Citi, —citighana, 64-65 ; — ghana-
citighana, 65-67 ;
citighana, 65-66 ©

Clark, W.E., Translation of Arya-
bhatiya, 37, 98

Conjunctions of planets, in a yuga,
86
Cube and cubing, 35-36

— varga-

A. Bb, 24

 

185

Cube root (ghanamhla), 37-38

DaSagitikasttra 1-32 ; —identi-
fication of the gitikas, 31-32
Datta, Bibhutibhushan, —on

Brahma and Brahman, 2
Datta and Singh, History of Hindu
Mathematics, 37, 52n, 72n, 84
Day(s) (divasa, dina), — civil, in a
yuga, 91 ; —commencement of
the first day of the yuga, 99;
of, 85-86 ; —of
Brahma, 92 ; — omitted : lunar

-—— measure

days in a yuga, 91 ; — sidereal,
in a puga, 91

Day-circle (ahora@tra-vrtta), radius
of, 132-33

Declination of the Sun, 17-19

Degree (arnsa, bhaga), circular mea-
sure, 85

Demons, residing at Badavimukha,
122-23

Deva, — Bija correction for Saka
444,97; —on the location of
Ujjayini, 124. See under Kara-
naratina also,

Dina, divasa (day): See under Day,

Diurnal motion, 130-31

Drggatijya, of the Sun and the
Moon, 146-47

Drkkarana, probably by Jyestha-
deva, 98

Drkksepa, 144-45

Drkksepa-jya, 144-45

Drkksepa-vrtia, 129


--- Page 260 ---
186,

Denmandala, 129
Dugan, R.S., 18n
Dussama, 92-93
Dvapara-yuga, 10, 11, 95
Dvigata (square), 35
Dvivedi, Sudhakara, 89n

Earth, —at the centre of the
Bhagola, 118ff.; —bright and
dark sides of, 117 ; —consti-
tution of, 118, 151 ; —increase
and decrease in size of, 118-19;
—linear diameter of, 15, 16,
17 ; —occupation by living
beings all round, 118 ; —rate

’ of growth ‘of, 119 ; —shape of,
118 ; —situation of, 118

Earth’s revolution, —number of
revolutions in a yuga, 6,7;
—refutation by Brahmagupta,
15

Earth’s rotation, 8, 13-15, 91,

. 119-20 : — according to com-
mentators of A, 8 ;—according
to Makkibhatta, 8 ; —acc. to
Prthdaka, 8; —mention in
Skanda-purana, 8 ; — objection
to the theory, 8 ; —refutation

_ by Varahamihira, 8

Earth’s shadow (Tamas), —-at the
_Moon’s distance, 153-54 ; —
calculation of the. length of,
152-53. ; —motion on the
ecliptic, 114; —nature of,
151

Earth-sine (ksitijy2), 135-36

 

 

APPENDIX IIT

Eccentric __ circles, — planetary
motion explained through,
104-5

Eclipses of the Sun and the Moon,
151-62 ; —condition for occur-
rence, 151-52. See also under
Lunar eclipse, Solar eclipse.

Ecliptic, —motion of planets etc.
on, 114 ff; —obliquity of,
17-18 ; —position of, 113-14 ;
~—right ascensions of, 133-34

Epicycles, — manda and Sighra, of
the planets, 22-28 ; —-plane-
tary motion explained through,
105 ff.

Epoch of time-reckoning, 6, 7, 8

Flint, Richard Foster, Glacial and
Pleistocene Geology, 119

Fractions, —reduction of, 70;

— inversion of, 71 ; —simpli-

fication of, 69-70

Ganesa Daivajiia, 98
Ganita, 1, 2

Ganita-kaumudi (GK) of Nar&yana,
34n, 37n, 57-58n, 60n, 68n, 70n,
7in

Ganita-stra-sangraha (GSS) of
Mahavira, 34-37n, 4In, 59n,
60-61n, 63n, 68n, 70-71n, 73.
See also Mahfvira.

Ganita-tilaka (GT) of Sripati, 34n,
36-37n, 68n, 70-71n

Geology of India, by D.N. Wadia,
119n


--- Page 261 ---
SUBJECT INDEX

Ghana (cube), 35-36

Ghana-gola (sphere), —volume of,
40-42

Ghana-mala (cube root), 37-38

Ghana-sankaland, 66

Ghata (multiplication), 35

Gitika-pada, 1-32

Glacial and Pleistocene Geology, by
Richard Foster Flint, 119.

Gnomon, —computations based
on, 56-58 ; —description of,
56

Gods (devas), ——residing at Meru,
122-23 ; —visibility of the Sun
for, 127; —year of, 92

Gola, 1, 2

Gola-pada, 113-64

Gola-yantra (armillary sphere), 113,
129-30

Govinda-svami, on ; —aeksavalana,
159 ; —-ayanadrkkarma, 151n ;
manda and Sighra epicycles, 25.
See also Laghu-Bhaskariya and
Maha-Bhaskariya.

Graha-ctra-nibandhana (GCN) of
Haridatta, 97n.
Haridatta,

See also

Grahalaghavé of Ganesa Daivajiia,
98

Greek astronomers, —planetary
diameters (angular), according
to, 16

Greek Mathematics, by Sir Thomas
Heath, 59n

 

187
Gulika (unknown quantity), —cal-

culation from given data, 72-73
Gunana (multiplication), 35
Gurvabda (Jovian years), 88-89
Gurvaksara_ (time for pronouncing
a long syllable), 85, 86

Hankel, 59

Haridatta, 97n ; on : —A, iii.10,
98 ; —Btja correction for Saka
444,97. See also Graha-cara-
nibandhana.

Hasta, measure of length, cubit,
19

Hati (multiplication), 35

Heath, Sir Thomas, 59n

Hemaraja Sarma, 94n

Himalayas, rate of uplifting of, 119

History of Hindu Mathematics, by
B. Datta and A. N. Singh, 37,
52n, 84

Hora (hour), —horesa-s, 103-4

Horizon (ksitija), 128

Hour (hora),—lords of the hours
(horesa-s), 103-4

Hypotenuse (karna), —basis for
the triangle and the rectangle,
55; theorems based on,
59-60

Iccha (requisition), in rule of three,
68-69

Intercalary months in a yuga, 91

Interest on principal, 68

Jaina texts, on the Meru, 121


--- Page 262 ---
168

Jambudvipa-samasa, 60n
Jinabhadra Gani, 69

Jovian years (gurvabda), 88-91 ;
—asterisms in which Jupiter
rises, 89; —names of, 88

Jupiter,—ascending nodes and apo-
gees of, 19-22 ; —inclination
of orbit, 17-18 ; —linear dia-
meter of, 15, 16, 17 ; — manda
and $ighra epicycles, 22-28 ;—
measure of orbit, 13 ; —-revo-
lutions in a yuga, 6,7; —
$ighrocca of, 6, 7.
under Planets.

See also

Jyotisakarandaka, on vyatipata, 87

Jyotitcandrika by
Sharma. 86n, 89n

Rudradeva

Kaksytmandala, °vrtta, 23; 9 —
motion. of planets along, 104-6

Kala (minute of arc), measure of,
86

Kalakriya, 1, 2

Kalakriya-pada (section on reckon-
ing of time), 85-112 ; —signi-
ficance of the term, 99

Kalardhajyah (Rsine-differences, in
minutes), 29-30

Kaliyuga, 95 ;—commencement of,
8-11; —started with the
Jovian year Vijaya, 91; —
the measure of, 8, 9-12

Kalpa, commencement of current,
according to Aryabhaja I, 8

 

APPENDIX It

| Karana-ratna (KR), of Deva, 17-19n,

23n, 97n, 123-24n, 150n,
also Deva.

See

Karani. (square), 34

Karna : See under Hypotenuse,

Kasyapa-samhi ta, on the division of
the yuga, 94n

Katapayadi system
numbers, 3n

Kaye, G.R., 37

Kern, H., on A, i.13, 31

of writing

Khagola (sphere of the sky), 128-30;
—observer at the centre of,
128-29 ;  —principal circles of,
113

Khanda-khadyaka (KR) of Brahma-
gupta, 7n, 17-20n, 56n, 87a,
98, 150-51n, 155n, 158-59. See
also Brahmagupta.

Krantivalana (= ayanavalana). See
Ayanavalana,

Krsna, Lord, — leaving the Earth
at the advent of Kali, 10n

Krtayuga 11, 95
Krti (square), 34

Ksetra, — in the sense of bhagola,

86; —in the sense of a sign
of the zodiac, 86

Ksetraphala (area) : See under Area.
Ksitijya (earthsine), 135-36
Kuruksetra, 10

Kurus, 10

Kusumapura (Pataliputra), 33


--- Page 263 ---
SUBJECT INDEX

Kutjakara (pulveriser), —néragra
(non-residual), 77-84 ; —sagra
(residual), 74-77

KFuvayu (terrestrial wind), 23-28

Laghu-Bhaskariya(LBh), of Bhaskara
I, 15n, 17-19n, 23n, 24, 25-26n,
109n, 111n, 115-16n,136n, 141n,
143n, 146n, 148n, 150n, 153
56n, 158-59n. See also under
Bhaskara I.

Laghu-Bhaskariya-vyakhya,

Sankaranardyana, 25;
Udayadivakara, 25

—by

189.
Level ground, testing of, 55

Lildvati (L) of Bhaskara II, 34n,
36-37n, 42n, 57-58n, 61n, 63-
65n, 68n, 70-71n,
under Bhiaskara II,

Loka-prakasa, on the Meru, 121n.

See also

Lunar eclipse, —Aksavalana, 158- —
359, 160 ; —ayanavalana, 159-
61; —colour of the Moon,
161; —eclipsed part at any
time, 156-58; —half-duration
(sthityardha), of, 154-55, 160 ;
uneclipsed part, 155-56

Laghu-manasa (LMa) of Maiijula, 98! Macdonell, A.A., 63n.

Lahiri, N.C., 7n, 20

Lalla, 98 ; —on manda and Sighra
epicycles, 24; —on the location
of Ujjayini, 124.
Sisya-dhi-vrddhida,

Lamp-post, —problems based on,
57-58

Lanka, hypothetical city on the
equator where the meridian of
Ujjain intersects it, 119,123-25;
—commencement of the revo-
lutions of the planets at, 6, 7,
8 ; —location of, 8 ; — planets
at the beginning of the yuga,
99

See also

Lehkodaya (right ascension), 133-34
Lata, a type of vyatipata, 87

Latitude-triangles
130-32, 143

(aksa-ksetra),

 

Mahabharata (battle), —-denoting
the commencement of the
Kaliyuga, 9, 10

Maha-Bhaskariya (MBh), of Bhas-
kara I, 13n, 15n, 17-19n, 23n,
24, 25-26n, S6n, 109n, 111n,
115-16n, 132-33n, 135n, 140-
44n, 146-48n, 150n, 153-55n,
158-59n, 160, 162n. See also
Bhaskara I.

Maha-Bhaskariya-vyakhya by Go-
vinda-svami, 25n, 121n, 151n
Mahasiddhanta of Aryabhata H,

30n, 36n, 42n, 61n, 63n, 68n,
70n, 71in, 99n, 123n, 156n

Mahavira, —on the volume of a
sphere, 41. See also Ganita-sdra-
sangraha,

Makaranda-saranl, 96n


--- Page 264 ---
190
Makkibhatta, on the rotation of
the Earth, 8 :
Manda and Sighra epicycles of

' planets, 22-28

Mandaphala of planets, 106-11

Mandocca : See under Apogees.

Manes, —visibility of the Sun for,
127 ; —year of, 92, 127

Maiijula (Muiijala), 98. See also
his work Laghumdnasa.

Manu (yuga), measure of, 9-12

Markandeya-purana, on the Meru,
121n

Mars,
apogees, 19-22 ; —inclination
of orbit, 17-18; —linear dia-
meter of, 15, 16,17 ; ——manda

22-28 ;

—measure of orbit, 13 5; —

— ascending nodes and

and Sighra epicycles,

revolutions in a yuga, 6,7 ; —
Sighrocca of, 6,7. See also
under Planets.

Masa (month), 85-86

Mati (optional number), (in
Kuttakara), 77ff.

Matsya-purana, on the Meru, 121n

Mean planets, computation of, 104-
11

Men, visibility of the Sun by, 127

Mercury, —ascending nodes and
apogees, 19-22 : —inclination
of orbit, 17-19 ; —linear dia-
meter, 15, 16, 17; —monda and

Sighra epicycle, 22-28 ; —Teva- '

 

APPENDIX IIT

lutions in a yuga, 6,7; —speci-
alities in computing, 114 ff;
—<Sighrocca of,
orbit, 13.
Planets.

Meridian of the Khagola, 128

measure of

See also under

Meru mountain, — description of,
121-23 ; —linear diameter of,
15

Minute (kala), circular division,
measure of, 86

Months (masa), 85-86 ; —com-
mencement of the first month
of the yuga, 99 ; —intercalary,
in a yuga, 91; —lunar, in a
yuga, 91

Modern astronomers, on :—angular
diameters of the planets, 16 ;
—apogees, 20; — ascending
nodes, 20 ; --inclination of
orbits, 18, 19 ;
period of planets in terms of
days, 7 ; —-synodic revolutions
and periods, 88

—sidereal

Modern geologists, rate of uplifting
of the Himalayas, 119

Modern values, —-of Rsine-diffe-
rences, 30

Moon, —colour during eclipse,
161 ;—constitution of, 151; —
drggatiiya, 146-47 ; —heliacal
visibility of, 116-17 ; — incli-

nation of orbit, 17-18;
linear diameter of, 15,
16,17; —manda epicycles


--- Page 265 ---
SUBJECT INDEX

of, 22-28 ;
orbit, 13 ; —motion of,
114-16, 162, 163 ;—-motion of
node, 114 ; — parallax, 147 ff.;
-—revolutions in a yuga, 6, 7 ;
—revolutions of
(candrocca) in a yuga, 6,7;

—measure of

apogee

—time of revolution, smallest,
1¢C0 ; —visibility at sunrise
and sunset, 116-17; — visibility
of the Sun for the manes who
live on the Moon, 127.
also under Planets.

See

Mountains, rate of growth of, 119

Moving bodies, time for meeting
of, 73-74

Multiplication, 34-35

Mula (Principal), 68

Na (Np), unit of length, 15, 16,
19

Nadi (ghati), measure of, 85, 86

Narayana :
kaumudi.

See under Ganite-

Nilakantha, on : A, ii.9, 44; —
Kali 3600 as epoch of zero
correction, 98 ; —location of
Ujjayini, 125-26 ;
mountain, 121 ; —plane figures,
(A, ii. 9), 44

Niragra-kuttakara — (_non-residual
pulveriser ), 77-84

—Meru

Notation by letters of the alphabet,
3-5

Notational places, 33-34

 

191
Nr (na), unit of length, 15, 16, 19

Numbers,—manipulations of, 67 ff.;
— method of writing, 3-5

Omitted lunar days in a yuga, 91
Orbit of planets See under

‘Planets’ and also under the
individual planets.

Pi (7), value of, 45

Patica-siddhantika (PSi), of Varaha-
mihira, 18n, 21n, 44n, 100-1n,
103n, 116n, 117, 118n, 123n,
127n, 135-36n, 140-41n, 144n,
155n, 158-59n, 161n, See also
Varahamihira.

Pandavas, 10

Para-Brahman, 2

Parallax of the Sun and the Moon,
147ff.

Paramegvara, on: A, iv. 38, on
visibility correction of planets,
150-51 ; —akgsavalana, 159; —
identification of the ten gitikas,
31, 32; —Kali 3600 as epoch of
zero correction, 98 ; —location
of Ujjayini, 124 5; —plane
figures (A, ii9), 44; —square
(A, ii. 3), 34; —sthityardha,
160; word ‘utkramana’ in A,
iv.38, 150-51

Para-sanku (Sun’s greatest gno-
mon), 144

Pata (nodes) of planets, —motion
on the ecliptic, 114

Pataliputra (Kusumapura), 33


--- Page 266 ---
152 APPENDIX hit

Patizanita (PG), of Sridhara, 34-
87n, 61n, 63-65n, 68n, 70-71n,
73n. See also Sridhara.

Paulisa-siddhanta, 33; on : —akga-
arkkarma, 148n ; — inclination
of the orbits, 18 ; —-method
for aksavalana, 158

Phala (‘fruit’), in rule of three,
68-69

Phaila (interest), 68

Platte figures in general, area of,
43-44. See also Circle, Square,
Trapezium, Triangle.

Planets, angular diameters, 16 ;
—anomalistic revolutions, 87-
88 ; ascending nodes and
apogees, 19-22 ; —bright and
dark sides, 117 ; —computation
of mean positions, 104-11 ; —
computation of true positions,
104-11 ; —conjunctions of, in
a puga, 86 ; daily motion of,
106 ; —determination of the
motion of, 162-63; — distance
of, from the Earth, 111; —
equality in the linear motion
of, 100; —heliacal visibility
of, 117; —inclination of the
orbits, 17-19 ; —lengths in
yojanas of the circular divisions
‘in the orbits, 101-2 ; —linear
diameters of, 15-17; —-manda
‘and Sighra epicycles, 22-28 ;
mandaphala, 106-11 ; —mean
arigular velocities, 102; + mean

 

 

motion acc. to Aryabhata, 7;
—mean motion acc. to mo-
derns, 7 ; —motion explained
through eccentric circles, 104.
5 ; — motion "explained thro-
ugh epicycles, 105-6; — motion
of, 114-16; —motion of nodes
of, 114 ; —non-equality of the
linear measures of the circular
motions, 101-2 ; —orbits, mea-
sure of, 13-15 ; —orbits, theory
of, 14-15 ; — orbits, inclination
of, 17-19; — position in relation
to the asterisms, 102-3 ; —
revolutions of, in a yuga, 6-8 ;
Sighraphala, 106-11 ; —Sighro-
ecas of, 6, 7 ; —synodic revo-
lutions of, 87-88; —velocity of,
111-12 ; —isibility of, 116-17.
See also under the individual
planets.

Plumb-test for verticality, 55

Prabhavadi Jovian years, 90

Pramana (argument) in the rule of
three, 68-69

Prana (time for one respiration),
85, 86

Pratimandala (eccentric circle),
motion of planets on the, 104-5

Pravaha-vayu (-anila), (provector
wind), 119

Prime vertical, 128

Principal and interest, 68

Prthudaka, on : —correct reading
bhuk for bham in A, i.6, 15 ;


--- Page 267 ---
SUBJECT INDEX

—— justification of A, iii.16, 104 ;
—motion of the Sighroccas of
Mercury and Venus, 115; —
supporting the theory of the
rotation of the Earth, 8, 120 ;
-—volume of a sphere, 41

Ptolemy, —angular diameters of
planets, 16 ; —apogees of
planets, 20; —ascending nodes
of planets, 22; —-distances of
the planets the Sun
when heliacally visible, 117 ;
~ ‘Earth is stationary’, 8, 120;

from

—inclination of planetary
orbits, 18, 19 ; —-manda and
Sighra epicycles, 23-24 ;

mean motion of planets, table

for, 7 ; —synodic revolutions
and periods, 88

Pulveriser (Kut(akara), 73-84; —
non-residual (niragra), 77-84 ;
—residual (sdgra), 74-77

Puranas, on the Meru, 121

Pyramid (sadasri), —sum of pile
of balls in, 64-65 ; —volume of,
39-40 ‘

Pythagoras’ theorem, 59

Raghunatha-raja, on: —apogees,
revolution of, 21-22 ; —ayana-
drkkarma, 151; —Kali year
3600, 96; —reads kvavarta
for bhavarta in A, ii,5, 91 ;
—location of Ujjayini, 126;

A. Bh. 25

193
—Meru mountain, 121; —plane
figures (A, ii.9), 44

Raja-Mrganka of Bhoja, 98

Rasi (sign), measure of, 85

Rectangle, construction of, 55

Revolution numbers
6-8

Right-ascension (Lankodaya), 133-
34

Romaka, hypothetical city on the
equator, 123

of planets,

Romaka-siddhanta, 33; —Apogees,
20; —inclination of the orbits,
18

Rotation of the Earth : See under
Earth’s rotation.

Rsines, geometrical derivation of
45-51 °

Rsine-differences, 29-30: —deri-
vation of, 51-54

Rudradeva Sharma, 86n, 89n
Rule of three (trairatika), 68-69
Russel, H.N,, 7n, 18n

Sabda-Brahma, 2

Sadasri (pyramid): See under Pyra-
mid,

Sagra-kuttakara, (residual pulveri-
ser), 74-77

Saka 444, —Bija corrections for,

97 ; —year of zero precession,
98


--- Page 268 ---
194

Sakabda correction, 98

Sambasiva Sastri, K., —Kali 3600
taken as epoch of zero correc-
tion, 38

Sarnvarga (multiplication), 34, 35

Sankalana, 64ff. —ghana-sankalana,
66-67 ; —varga-sankalana, 66

Sankalita-sankalita, sum of the

series S3n, 64-65

Sankaranardyana, on : —end points
of the anamolistic quadrants,
25; —manda and Sighra epi-
cycles, 25

Sanku (gnomon), —computations,
based on, 56-58 ; —description
of, 56

Sanku (Rsine of altitude), 139ff.
Sankvagra of the Sun, 141ff.

Sara (arrows) of intercepted arcs
of intersecting circles, 60-61

Sastri, T.S. Kuppanna, 98

Saturn, — ascending nodes and
apogees of, 19-22; —inclination
of orbit, 17-19 ; —linear dia-
meter of, 15, 16, 17 ; —manda
and Sighra epicycles of, 22-28 ;
—measure of orbit, 13; —
revolutions in a yuga, 6,7;
—8Sighrocca of, 6,7 ; —time of
revolution, longest, 100. See
also under Planets.

Sengupta, P.C., 7n, 8, 16n, 20, 21n,
30

Series: See A.P. Series,

 

APPENDIX III

Shadow-sphere, radius of, 56
Shamasastry, R., 87n

Siddhanta-dipika, of Paramesvara,
159n

Siddhanta-Sekhara (SiSe) of Sripati,
7n, 20n, 34-37n, 42n, 57n, 61n,
63-65n, 68n, 70-72n, 99n, 103n,
105n, 113-15n, 117-19n, 128n,
156n. See also Sripati.

Siddhanta-Siromani (SiSi) of Bhas-
kara lI, 30n, 55n, 99n, 103n,
105n, 113-15n, 118n, 123-24n,
128n, 131n, 149-50n, 158n,
160n. See also Bhiskara II.

Siddhapura, hypothetical city on
the equator, 123

Sidereal division of time, 85-86

Sighra epicycles of planets, 22-28

Sighraphala of planets, 106-11

Sighroccas, 8; —determination of
the motions of, 163

Sign (ra@si), circular division, mean-
ing of, 86

Sisya-dhi-vrddhida (SiDVr), of Lalla,
23n, 24, 25-26n, 30n, 55n, 98,
100-102n, 105n, 109n, 111n,
113-19n, 122-24n,126n,128-29n,
149n, 156n. See also Lalla.

Sixty-year cycle of Jovian years,
89-91

Skanda-Purana, supports the ro-
tation of the earth, 8

Sky, orbit of, 13, 14, 15


--- Page 269 ---
SUBJECT INDEX

Solar eclipse, 151-62 ; —parallax
in, 144-47; —when not to be
predicted, 161-62

Solar system, Tn

Solar year : See under Year.

Someévara, on: — A, i.13, 32 :—A,
iv.4, 116; A, iv.31, 143 ;—beg.
of Kali, 10; —daily motion
of planets, 106 ;
nation of the planets

—determi-

from
observation, 162-63 ; —identi-
fication of the ten gitikas, 31;
—Kuttakara, 79; —location of
Ujjayini, 124 : —Meru moun-
tain, 121; -opposing the theory
of the rotation of the Earth,
120; —plane figures (A, ii.9),
44; —planetary orbits, 13n ;
—sthityardha, 160; —-word
utkramana in A, iv.36, 150-51

Smart, W.M., 8n

Sphere (ghanagola),
40-42

Spherical astronomy, 13051

volume of,

Spherical astronomy, Text-book on,
8n

Square and squaring, 34-35

Square root (vargamula), 36-37

Stidhara, on
sphere, 42
Sripati, —on the volume of a

sphere, 42. See also Ganita-
tilaka, Siddhanta-sekhara,

the volume of a

Stars, apparent motion of, 119-20

195
Stewart, J.Q., 7n, 18n
Sthityardha : See under Lunar
eclipse.
Sumati, 30

Sumatikarana of Sumati, 30n

Sumatt-maha-tentra (SMT), 158n,
159n.

Sumatitantra of Sumati, 30n

Sun, —Arkagra, 141ff. ; —consti-
tution of, 151 ; —declination
of, 17-19 ; —determination of
the motion of, 162 ; —drggati-

. Jya, 146-47 ; —eclipse of, see
under Solar eclipse ; —linear
diameter of, 15, 16,17 ; —
manda epicycles of, 22-28 ; —
measure of orbit of, 13; —
motion along the ecliptic, 114;
—para-sanku (greatest gnomon), ©
144 ; —parallax of, 147ff.; —
revolutions in a yuga, 6,7 3
— visibility for the gods, manes
and men, 127, See also under
Planets.

Stryadeva, on: 4, ii.9, 91; —A,
iii, 22-23, on the computation
of planets, 110; A, iv.31,143; —
apogees, revolution of, 21, 22 ;
—beginnings of the anomalistic
quadrants, 25n ; —drggatijya,
146 ; —examples on triangle,
A, ii.6, 55; —God Brahma
1-2 ; —golayantra, 129-30 ; —
identification of the ten gitrkas,
31 ; —Kali year 3600, 96 ; —


--- Page 270 ---
196
Kali 3600 as epoch of zero
correction, 98; —kuttakaira, 77;
——location of Ujjayini, 124-
25 ; —plane figures, (A, ii. 9),
44; —-valana, 161; —word
utkramana in A, iv.38, 150-51

i
Surya Narayana Siddhanti, 90n

Surya-siddhanta (SnSi), 30, 55n, 92,
100-In, 111, 113n, 128n ; —
Tr. by E. Burgess, 20n, 2!n,
30n

Sarya-siddhania (Old), 33; —on
aksavalana, 159

Susama, 92-93

Svayambhuva- siddhanta,
siddhanta), 33, 164

Syamantapaiicaka, 10

(Brahma-

Taittirtya Samhita, —on A.P. Series,
63

Taliaferro, R.C., 18n, 20n, 21n, 24n,
120n

Tatpara (Third of arc), measure of,
86

Tamas (Earth’s shadow) : See under
Earth’s shadow.

Tantra-sangraha (TS) of Nilakantha,
156n. See also Nilakantha.

Tattvar thadhigama-sutra, 60n

Text-book on Astronomy, by C.A.
Young, 119

Text-book of General Astronomy, by
CA, Young, 22n

APPENDIX 11

Texi-book on spherical astronomy,
by W.M. Smart, 8n.

Theon of Alexandria, 37

Third (tatpara), in circular division,
measure of, 86

Three, rule of, (trairaSika), 68-69

of, 85-86 ; —

measuring of, 99 ; —reckoning

of, 85-112 ; without - begin-

ning or end, 99

Time, —divisions

Tithipralaya (omitted lunar days),
91

Trairasika (rule of three), 68-69
Trapezium, area of, 42-43
Treta-yuga, 95

Triangle (tribhuja), —area of, 38-
39 ; —construction of, 55

Tribhuja (triangle) : See Triangle.

“Trigatika (Tris),-of Sridbara, 42n.

See also Sridhara,

True planets,
104-11

computation of,

Twelve-year cycle of Jupiter, 88-89

Tycho Brahe, angular diameters
of planets, 16

Udayadivakara, on :— beginning of
the anomalistic quadrants, 25 ;
—correct reading bhuh for
bham in A, i.6, 15 ; —manda
and Sighra epicycles, 25

Udvartana (multiplication), 35


--- Page 271 ---
SUBJECT INDEX

Ujjain, (Avanti), —meridian at, 8 ;
—situation of, 123-26

Umisvati, 60.*

—_—_——

1. Umasvati is reputed to be
one of the greatest metaphysicians
of India and is held in high esti-
mation by the two main sections
of the Jainas. Unfortunately, his
time and place of birth have not
been settled definitely. According
to the tradition of the Svetambara
Jainas, Umasvati was born in the
now forgotten city of Nyagrodhika.
His name is said to have been a
combination of the names of his
parents, the father Svati and the

mother Uma. He was the disciple

of the saint Ghosanandi. He
lived about 150 B.C. His disciple
Syamarya or Syamacarya, the
author of the Prajiizpand-snira, is
said to have died 376 years after
Sri Vira, that is, in 92 B.C. and
his earliest (commentator is said to
have been Siddhasena Gani, or
Divakara who lived c. 56 B.C. The
Digambara tradition, on the other
hand, sometimes, even changes his
name thinks it to be
Umiasvami, not Umasvati. Accord-
ing to it, he lived from 135 A.D.
to 219 A.D. Satish Chandra Vidya-

and

bhushan is of the opinion that he |

flourished in the first century A.D.
Ail are, however, agreed on one
point, viz., that Umasvati resided in

the city of Kusumapura (modern
Patna).

 

 

197

Unknown quantities, —from equal
sums, 72-73; —from sum of all
but one, 71-72

Utkramana, word in A, iv.36, inter-
pretation of, 150-51

Utsarpini, 92-93, 94
Vaidhrti, a type of vyatipata, 87

Vaiasaneya -
Series, 63

Samhita, on A. P,

Varahamihira, 18, 20, 117 ; —-on
akgavalana, 158, 159; —on the
location of Ujjayini, 125-26 ;
—refutation of the rotation of

"the Earth, 8, 119. See also
Brhat-jataka,  Brhat-sarnhita,
Paiica-siddhantika,

Varga (square), 34-35

Varga-letters denoting numbers, 3-5
Varga-places for numbers, 3, 4,5
Vargamala (square-root), 36-37
Vargana (square), 34
Varga-sankalana, 66

Varsa (year) : See under Year.
Vasistha-siddhanta, 33, 117
Vasubandhu, 121n

Vatesvara, —justification of A, iii.
16 against Brahmagupta, 104 ;
—reply to Brahmagupta on the
concept of the yugas, 12

Vatesvara-siddhanta, 12n, 113-15n,
122n, 128n

Vayu-purdya, on the Meru, 121n
Vedanga-Jyautisa, 87n


--- Page 272 ---
198

Venus, —ascending nodes and
apogees, 19-22 ; —inclination
of orbit, 17-19 ; —linear dia-
meter, 15, 16, 17 ;
and Sighra epicycles, 22-28; —
revolutions in a yuga, 6,7; ——

—manda

revolutions of Sighrocca in a
yuga, 6, 7; —Sighrocca of,
measure of orbit, 13 ;—
specialities in the computation
of, 114 ff. See
Planets.

also under

Verticality, testing of, 55

Vijayadi-varsa (sixty-year cycle of
Jupiter), 89-91

Vikala (second of arc), measure of,
86

Vinadika (vighati),
85, 86

Visnu-puraga, on the Meru, 121n

measure of,

Visvanatha, on Kali year 3600, 96

Vowels, denoting numbers, 3, 4, 5

Vytia (circle) : See under Circle.

Vyatipata, 86-87 ;
86-87

Wadia, D.N., Geology of India,
119.

—in a yuga,

Water-test for level ground, 55

 

APPENDIX II!

Yavakarana (squaring), 34

Yavakoti, hypothetical city on the
equator, 123

Year (abda, varsa), 85, 86 ; —
commencement of the first year
of the yuga, 99; —measure of,
15; —of gods (divine), 92;
—of manes, 92; —of men,

92 ; —solar, in a yuga, 91
Yojana, 19

Young, C.A., —on the motion of
Mercury, 22n; —on thé growth
of the Earth, 119

Yudhisthira, 10n

Yuga, —abraded, with correspon-
ding revolutions, 94 ; —ano-
malistic revolutions in, 87-88 ;
—commencement of, 99 ; —
commencement of the current,
6, 7, 8 ; —divisions of, 92-94,
95 ; —Jovian years in, 88 ; —
length of, 92 ; —revolutions of

6-8 ; —synodic

revolutions in, 87-88. See also

under the individual yugas.

planets in,

Yuga of five years, vyatipatas in,
87

Zero-point of time reckoning, 6


--- Page 273 ---
APPENDIX IV

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

ON ARYABHATIYA AND ALLIED LITERATURE

A. Primary Sources

Apastamba-sulba-stitra

1.

2.

3

Ed. with the coms. of Kapardisvamin, Karavinda and
Sundararaja, Oriental Res. Inst., Mysore, 1931, (Bibl. Sanskrita,
No. 73).

Ed. with German Tr. by A. Birk, ZDMG, 55 (1901) 543-91; 56
(1902) 327-91.

Ed. and Tr. into English, by Satya Prakash and R.S. Sharma,
New Delhi, 1968.

Aryabhatiya of Aryabhata (6. A.D. 476)

1.

Cr. ed. with Intro., Eng. Tr., Notes, Comments and Indexes, by
K.S. Shukla and K.V. Sarma, Indian National Sc. Academy,
New Delhi, 1976.

Cr. ed. with the commentary of Bhaskara I, with Intro. and
Appendices, by K.S. Shukla, Indian National Sc. Academy,
New Delhi, 1976.

Cr. ed. with the commentary of Stryadeva Yajva, with Intro.
and Appendices, by K.V. Sarma, Indian National Sc. Academy,
New Delhi, 1976.

Cr. ed. with the com. Bhatadipika of Paramadisvara
(4:Paramegvara) by H. Kern. Leiden, 1874; Reprint, 1972 ;
Together with Hindi tr. by Udaya Narain Singh, Madhurapur
(Muzaffarpur), 1906.

Pt. I, Ganitapada and Pt. Il, Kalakriyapada, ed. with the com.
entitled Mahabhasya of Nilakantha Somasutvan, by K.
Sdmbagiva Sfstsi, Trivandrum, 1930, 1931; Pt. III, ed. by
Suranad Kuijan Pillai, 1957, (TSS, 101, 110, 185).

Ed. with Hindi Tr., Notes and Intro., by R.N. Rai, Indian
National Sc. Academy, New Delhi, 1976.

199


--- Page 274 ---
260 APPENDIX IV

7. Ed. with Sanskrit and Hindicom., by B. Mishra, Bihar Res.
Soc., Patna, 1966. .

8. Ed. with Mal. com. by P.S, Purushottaman Namputiri, S.T.
Reddiar and Sons, Quilon, 1113 M.E.

9. (Gitika-pada) : Ed. with Mal. com. and Intro., by Kolatheri
Sankara Menon, Trivandrum, 1927, (Sri Vanchi Setu
Lakshmi Series, No. 7).

10. With the Telugu com. entitled Sudhataranga of K. Kodan-
darama Siddhanti, ed. by V. Lakshminarayana Sastri,
Madras, 1956, (Madras Gov. Or. Ser., No. 139).

11. (Tr. into Eng. of Ganitapada) : ‘Notes on Indian mathematics :
2. Aryabhata’, by G.R. Kaye, JASB, (NS), 4 (1908) 111-41.

12. Tr. into Eng. with Notes, by W.E. Clark, Univ. of Chicago
Press, Chicago, 1930.

13. Tr. into Eng. by P.C. Sengupta, J of the Deptt. of Letters,
Calcutta Univ., 16 (1927) 1-56.

14. The Aryabhatiya translated into English, by B. R, Shastry,
Chicago, 1925 (unpublished thesis).

15. (Tr. into German): Die Mathematik des Aryabhata, Text,
Ubersetzung aus dem Sanskrit und Kommentar, von Kurt
Elfering. Wilhehm Fink Verlag, Nikolaistrasse 2, 8 Munchen-
40, 1975.

16. (Tr. into French of the Ganitapada) :- ‘Lecons. de calcul
d’Aryabhata’, par M. Leon Rodet, JA, ser. 7, tome 13 (1879)
393-434.

Atharvana-J yotisa -
1. Ed. by Bhagavad Datta, Lahore, 1 1924, .

2. With Hindi tr. by C.L. Sarma and O. N. Dvivedi, Datya
(M. P.).

Bakhshali Manuscript
Ed. by G.R. Kaye, Archaeological Survey of India, New
Imperial Series, No. 43, Pts. I and II, Calcutta, 1927 ; Pt. HI,
Delhi, 1933.

Baudhayana-sulba-sitra

1. Ed. by W. Caland in vol, Il of his edn. of Baudhayana-srauta-—
sutra in 3 vols. Calcutta, 1913.


--- Page 275 ---
RIBLIOGRAPHY: PRIMARY SOURCES ~ 201

2. Ed. with Dvarakanatha Yajvan’s com. and Tr. into Eng. by
G. Thibaut, Pandit (OS), 9-10 (1874-75) ; (NS) 1 (1876-77),
Benares.

3. With Thibaut’s Tr., ed. by Satya Prakash and R.S. Sharma,
New Delhi, 1968.

Bijaganita of Bhaskara II (b. A.D. 1114)

l. Ed. by Sudhakara Dvivedi, with expository notes, Benares,
Rev. edn., 1927, (Benares Skt. Ser., No. 154).

2. Ed. with the com. Navahkura of Krsna Daivajiia, by V.G.
Apte, Poona, 1930, (Anandasrama Skt. Ser., No. 99).

3. With com. Bijapallava of Krsna Daivajiia by T. V. Radha-
krishana Sastri, Tanjore, 1958. (Tanjore Sarasvati Mahal
Ser., No. 78).

4. Ed. with Hindi Tr. and Notes by Durga Prasad Dvivedi,
N.K. Press, Lucknow, 1917.

5. Ed. with a Skt. com. and tr. and notes in Hindi, by
Viguddhanand Gaur, Benares, 1943.

(Tr. of Bijaganita) : Algebra with Arithmetic and Menguration.
Translated from the Sanskrit of Brahmegupta and Bhascara,
by H.T. Colebrooke, London, 1817 ; Rep. 1972.

7. With Notes (in Mal.), by P.K. Koru, Mangalodayam, Trichur,
1960.

Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta of Brahmagupta (A.D. 628)

1. Ed. with his own com. by Sudhakara Dvivedi, Benares, 1902.

2. Ed. with Sudhakara’s com. and his own com. Vasana and
Hindi Tr. by Ram Swarup Sharma, with Introduction by
Satya Prakash, 4 vols., New Delhi, 1966.

3, (Tr. of chs. 12 and 18) : Colebrooke, H.T., Algebra with Arith-
metic and Mensuration from the Sanskrit of Brahmegupta and
Bhascara, London, 1817 ; Rep. 1972.

4. With the com. of Prthtidaka (A.D. 860), Ms. in India Office

Library, London ; Transcript in Lucknow Univ. Library,
Lucknow. .

Bijaganitavatamsa (incomplete) of Narayana Pandita

Ed. by K.S. Shukla, Akhila Bharatiya Sanskrit Parishad,
Lucknow, 1970.

A. Bh. 25


--- Page 276 ---
202 APPENDIX IV

Brhajjataka of Varahamihira (d. A.D. 587).

1. Ed. with com. Vivrti of Bhattotpala, by Sita Ram Tha, Benares,
1922.

2. Horasastra with Vivaranz of Rudra, Trivandrum, 1958,
(Trivandrum Skt. Ser., No. 91).

Ed. with Eng. Tr. by V. Subrahmanya Sasiri, Mysore, 1929.

4. Tr. with Notes in Hindi, by Ram Ratna Awasthi, 5th edn.,
T. K. Press, Lucknow, 1972.

Brhajjyotih-sara
Compiled and Tr. by Stirya Narayana Siddhanti, T.K. Press,
Lucknow, 1972.

Brhatsamhita of Varahamihira (d. A.D. 587)

1. Ed. with the com. of Bhattotpala, by Sudhakara Dvivedi,
2 vols., Benares, 1895-97, (Vizienagaram Skt. Ser., No. 10) ;
by Avadh Bihari Tripathi, 1968, (Sarasvati Bhavana Grantha-
mala, No. 97).

2. (Tr. in Eng.) : B or Complete system of Natural Astrology, by
H. Kern, Verspriede Geschriften (Collected Works), ’s-Graven-
hage, 1913.

3. Ed. with Eng. Tr. by V. Subrahmanya Sastri and M. Rama-
krishna Bhat, 2 vols., Bangalore, 1947.
4. - Hindi Tr. by Baldev Prasad Misra, Bombay, 1940.
Ed. with Mal. Tr. by P.S. Purushottaman Namputiri, Sri Rama
Vilasam, Quilon, 2nd edn., 1955.
Candraprajitapti
Ed. with Hindi Tr. by Amolakarisi, Hyderabad, Virasarnvat
2445.
Dhikotida-karana of Sripati (A.D. 1039)
Cr. ed. with Intro., Tr. and Notes by K.S, Shukla, Lucknow,
1969,
Dhi-vyddhida-tantra of Lalla (A.D. 8th cent.)
See Sisya-dhi-vyddhida.
Drgganita of Paramesvara (A.D. 1431).

Cr. ed. with Intro., by K.V. Sarma, V.V.R. Inst., Hoshiarpur,
1963.


--- Page 277 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY: PRIMARY SOURCES . 203

Ganitakaumudi of Narayana Pandita (A.D. 1356).
Ed. by Padmakara Dvivedi, 2 Pts., Benares, 1936, 1942,
(Princess of Wales Sarasvati Bhavana Texts, No. 57).
Ganitanuyoga
Comp. by Muni Kanhaiyalal ‘Kamala’, tr. by M.L. Mehta, and
ed. by S.C. Bharilla, Sanderao (Rajasthan), 1970.

Ganitasarasangraha of Mahavira (A.D. 850)

1. Ed. with Eng. Tr. and Notes, by M. Rangacharya, Madras,
1912.

2. Ed. with Hindi Tr., by L.C. Jain, Sholapur, 1963.

Ganitatilaka (incomplete) of Sripati (A.D. 1039)
Ed. with the com. of Simhatilakastri (c. A.D. 1275), with
- Intro. and App., by H.R. Kapadia, Baroda, 1937, (Gaekwad’s
Or. Ser., No. 78). ,

Goladipika (1) of Parame$vara (A.D. 1431)
Ed. by T. Ganapati Sastri, Trivandrum, 1916, (TSS, No 49).

Goladipika (2) of Parameévara (A.D. 1431)

Cr. ed. with auto-com., Intro. and Tr., by K.V. Sarma, Adyar,

1957, .
Golasara of Nilakantha Somayaji (A.D. 1444-1545)

Cr. ed. with Intro. and Tr., by K.V. Sarma, Hoshiarpur, 1970.
Grahacaranibandhana of Haridatta (c. A.D. 650-700)

Cr. ed. with Intro. and App., Grahacaranibandhana-sahgraha,

by K.V. Sarma, K.S.R. Inst., Madras, 1954.
Grahalaghava-karana of Ganeéa Daivajfia (A.D. 1520)

1. Ed. with the com. of Mallari (A.D. 1602), Visvanatha (A.D.
1612) and his own by Sudhakara Dvivedi, Benares, 1925.

2. Ed. with his own com. Sudhamajijari and Hindi Tr. by
Sitarama Jha, 2nd edn., Benares, 1941.

Grahana-mandana of Parame$vara (A.D. 1431)
Cr. ed. with Intro. and Tr., by K.V. Sarma, Hoshiarpur, 1965.

Grahana-nyayadipika of Paramesvara (A.D. 1431)
Cr. ed. with Intro. and Tr., by K.V. Sarma, Hoshiarpur, 1966.


--- Page 278 ---
204 APPENDIX IV

Grahanastaka of Parame$vara (A.D. 1431)

Cr. ed. with Intro. and Tr., by K.V. Sarma, K.S.R. Institute,
Madras, 1961.

Jambidvipa-prajiiapti
Ed. by A.N. Upadhye and H.L. Jain, Jaina Samskrti
Sathraksaka Sangha, Sholapur, 1958.

Jambuadyipa-samasa of Umasvati
Ed. with the Tika of Vijai Singh Suri, Ahmedabad, 1922.
(Satyavijaya Granthamala, No. 2).

J yotisa-siddhanta-sangraha

A collection of the Soma-siddhanta, the Brahma-siddhanta of
the Sakalya-samhita, the Paitamaha-siddhanta of the Visnu-
dharmottara-purana and the Vrddha-V asistha-siddhanta, ed. by
Vindhyesvari Prasad Dvivedi, Benares, 1912.

Jyotiscandrarka by Rudradeva Sarma, N.K. Press, Lucknow.

Karana-kaustubha of Krsna Daivajiia (A.D. 1653).
Ed. by D.V. Apte, Poona, 1927, (An.SS, No. 96)

Rarana-kutahala of Bhaskara II (b. A.D. 1114)

1. Ed. with his own com. Vasana by Sudhakara Dvivedi, Benares,
1881.

2. Ed. with the com. Ganaka-kumuda-kaumudi of Sumatiharsa,
by Madhava Sastri, Bombay, 1901.
Karanamrta of Citrabhanu (c. A-D. 1475-1550)
Ed. with anon. com., by V. Narayanan Namboodiri, Trivan-
drum, 1975, (TSS, No. 240).
Karana-paddhati of Putumana Somayaji (c. A.D. 1660-1740)
1. Ed. by K. Sambasiva Sastri, Trivandrum, 1937, (TSS, No. 126).
2. Cr ed. with two anon. Mal. coms., by S.K. Nayar, Madras,
1956, (Madras Govt. Or. Ser., No. 98).
3. Ed. with Mal. Notes, by P.K. Koru, Cherp, 1953.

Karana-prakasa of Brahmadeva (A.D. 1092)

1. Ed. with explanatory notes in Skt. by Sudhakara Dvivedi,
Benares, 1889.

2. With anon. Com. Ms.

Karana-ratna of Deva (A.D. 689)
Cr. ed. with Intro., Tr. and Notes etc., by K.S. Shukla. Ms.


--- Page 279 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY : PRIMARY SOURCES 205

Karanendugekhara of Brahmadatta, son of Kali Prasada, Bombay,
1904.

Karanottama of Acyuta Pisarati (A.D. 1550-1621)

Ed. with auto-com., by K. Raghavan Pillai, Trivandrum, 1964,
(TSS, No. 213).

Kasyapa-samhita
Ed. by Somanatha Sarma, with an intro. by Hemaraja Sarma,
Jadavaji Trikamaji Acharya, Bombay, 1938.
Katyayana-Sulba-sutra ,

1. Ed. with Karka’s Bhasya and. Mahidhara’s Vrtti, Benares,
1936, (Kashi Skt, Ser., No. 120).

2. Ed. with the com. of Ramacandra Vajapeyi and Tr. by G.
Thibaut, Pandit, (NS), 4 (1882).
Khanda-khadyaka of Brahmagupta (A.D. 665)
- 1. Ed. with Vasanabhasya of Amaraja, ed. by Babuaji Misra,
Calcutta Univ., 1925.

2. Ed. with the com. of Caturveda Prthtidakasvamin, (A.D. 864),
ed. by P.C. Sengupta, Calcutta Univ., 1941.

3. Cr. ed. with the com. of Bhattotpala and Tr. in Eng., by Bina
Chatterji, 2 vols., World Press, Calcutta, 1970.

4. Tr. into Eng., by P.C. Sengupta, Calcutta Univ., 1934.

Kuttakara-siromani of Devaraja
Ed. by B.D. Apte, Poona, 1944, (An. SS, No. 125).

Laghu-Bhaskariya of Bhaskara I (A.D. 629)
1. Cr. ed. with the com. Vivarana of Sahkaranarayana, Trivan-
drum, 1949, (TSS, No. 162).
2. Ed. with the com. of Parame$vara, Poona, (An.SS, No. 128).
3. Cr. ed. with Tr. and Intro., by K.S. Shukla, Lucknow Univ.,
1963. :

Laghumanasa of Muiijala (A.D. 932)
1. Ed. with com. of Paramesvara, Poona, 1944, (An.SS, No. 123).
2. Ed. with Tr. and critical notes, by N.K. Majumdar, Calcutta,
1951.
3. Cr. edn. with com. of Yallaya, by K:V. Sarma, Ms.
Lilayati of Bhaskara II (6. A.D. 1114)
1. Ed. with the coms. Buddhivilasini of GaneSa Daivajiia (A.D.
1545) and Vilasa of Mahidhara, Poona, 1937, 2 Parts, (An.SS,
No. 107).


--- Page 280 ---
206 APPENDIX IV

2. Cr. ed. with Kriyakramakart, an elaborate exposition of the
rationale, by Sankara (A.D. 1534) and Narayana (A.D. 1607),
with Intro. and Appendices by K.V. Sarma, Hoshiarpur, 1975.

3. Tr. into English, by J. Taylor, Calcutta, 1816.

(Tr. into English of Lilavati): Algebra with Arithmetic and
Mensuration. Translated from the Sanskrit of Brahmegupta and
‘Bhascara, by H.T. Colebrooke, London, 1817 ; Reprint, 1972.

5. Ed. with Colebrooke’s Tr. with Notes, by Haran Chandra
Benerji, 2nd edn., Calcutta, 1927.

6. Ed. with Mal. Tr. and Notes, by P.K. Koru, Mangalodayam,
Trichur, 1954.

Maha-Bhaskariya of Bhaskara I (A.D. 629)

1. Cred. with the Bhasya of Govindasvamin and the super-
commentary Siddhantadipika of Parameévara, Intro. and
App., by T.S. Kuppanna Sastri, Madras, 1957, (Madras Govt.
Or, Ser., No. 130).

2. Ed. with the com. Karmadipika by Parameévara, Poona, 1945,
(An.SS, No. 126).

3.

Cr.ed. and Tr. into Eng. with Intro. , by K.S. Shukla, Lucknow,
1960,

Mahasiddhanta of Aryabhata II (c. A.D. 950)

1. Ed. by Sudhakara Dvivedi, with his own com., Benares, 1910,
(Benares Skt. Ser., No. 36).

2. The Purvaganita of A’s M, ed. and tr. by S. Rajeswara Sarma,
2 Parts, Erich Mauersberger, Marburg, 1966.

Manava-Sulba-stitra
1. Ed. in Manava-srauta-sutra, by J.M. van Gelder, New Delhi,
1961, (Satapitaka Ser., No. 17).

2 Tr. by N.K. Mazumdar, J of the Deptt. of Letters, Calcutta
Univ., 8 (1922) 327-42.

Paitcasiddhantika of Varahamihira (d. A.D. 587)

1. Ed. with an original com. in Skt. by Sudhakara Dvivedi and
Eng. Tr. by G. Thibaut, Benares, 1889; Rep., Motilal

Banarsidas, Benares, 1930; Rep., Varanasi, 1968, (Chaukhamba
Skt. Studies, No. 68),


--- Page 281 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY : PRIMARY SOURCES , 207

2. Pt. I. Text and Tr., by D. Pingree ; Pt. II. Com. (in Eng.),
by O. Neugebauer and D. Pingree, Royal Danish Academy of
Sciences and Letters, Copenhagen, 1970, 1971.

Patiganita of Sridhara (c. A.D. 900)
Ed with anon. com., Eng. Tr. and Notes, by K.S. Shukla,
Lucknow Univ., 1959,

Rajamyganka of Bhoja (A D. 1042)
Ed. by K. Madhava Krishna Sarma, Adyar Library, Adyar,
Madras, 1940.

Rasigolasphutaniti acc. to Acyuta (A.D, 1550-1621)
Cr. ed. with Intro. and Tr. by K.V. Sarma, Vishveshvaranand
Inst., Hoshiarpur, 1977.

Rekhaganita of Samrat Jagannatha (A.D. 1719)

Ed. with Notes by K.P. Trivedi, 2 vols., Bombay, 1901, 1902,
(Bombay Skt. Ser., Nos. 61, 62),

Romaka-siddhanta
Ms.

Sadratnamala of Saakaravarman (A.D. 1800-38)
Ed. with auto-com (in Mal.), (inc.), Kavanodayam (Mal. J1.)
16 (1898).
Sarvananda-karana
By GS. Apte, Ujjain, 1931.
Sarvananda-laghava of G.S. Apte
Ed. with the com. in. Hindi of Mukunda-vallabha Miéra, by
Purusottama Sarma, Lahore, 1937.
Siddhanta-darpana of Candraéekhara Sithha (A.D. 1835)
Ed. with Intro. by Jogeschandra Roy, Calcutta, 1899.
Siddhantadarpana of Nilakantha Somayaji (A.D. 1444-1545)
Cr. ed. with Tr. and App., by K.V. Sarma, Hoshiarpur, 1976.
Siddhanta-sarvabhauma of Muni§vara (A.D. 1646)
Ed. by Muralidhara Thakkura, 2 Pts., Benares, 1932, 1933,
Siddhantasekhara of Sripati (A.D. 1039)

Ed. with com. of Makkibhatta (for chs. 1-4) and com. of
Babuaji Misra (for chs. 5-20), 2 Pts., Calcutta Univ., 1932, ©
1947. ‘ - :


--- Page 282 ---
208

APPENDIX IV

Siddhanta-siromani of Bhaskara II (6. A.D. 1114)

1.

Ed. by Bapudeva Sastri and rev. by Ganapati Deva Sastri,
Benares, 1929.

Ed. Grahaganitadhyaya Sn., with Vasanabhasya, Poona, 1939,
(An.SS, No. 110).

Ed. Geladhyaya with Vasanabhasya and com. Marici of Muni-
§vara, Poona, 1943, (An. SS, No. 122).

_Ed. with the com. entitled Vasana-varttika of Nrsimha and the

com. entitled Marici of Muniévara (c. A.D. 1635), vol. I (ch. i
of Ganitadhyaya), Benares, 1917.

Grahaganita, ed. with the com. of Gane§adaivajiia, by V.D.
Apte, 2 Pts., Poona, 1939, 1941,

Notes in Skt. entitled Tippani-vivarana by Buddhi Nath Jha
Darbhanga, 1912.

English Translation of Goladhyaya, by L. Wilkiason, rev. by
Bapu Deva Sastri, Calcutta, 1861.

Siddhanta-sundara of Jtianaraja (A.D. 1503), Ms.

Siddhanta-tattvaviveka of Kamalakara (A.D. 1658)

1.
2.

Ed. with auto-com. Sesavasana, Benares, 1885.

Ed. with a com. in Sanskrit entitled Vasanabhasya by Ganga-
dhara Misra. Pt. I (chs. i-iii); N. K. Press, Lucknow, 1928;
Pt. II (chs. iv-ix), Bhagalpur, 1935; Pt. HIE (chs. x-xiv),
Benares, 1941.

Sisya-dhi-vrddhida of Lalla (or Ralla) (A.D. 8th cent.)

1.
2.

3.

Ed. by Sudhakara Dvivedi, Benares, 1886.

With the com. of Mallikarjuna Siri (A.D. 1178). Cr. ed. by
Bina Chatterji, Ms.

With the com. of Bhaskara II (6. A-D. 1114). Ms.

Soma-siddhanta

With the com. of Mamidi Singanacarya. Ms.

Sphufacandrapti of Madhava of Sangamagrama (c. A.D. 1340-1425)

Cr. ed. with Tr. and Intro., by K.V. Sarma, Hoshiarpur, 1973:

Sphutanirnaya-Tantra of Acyuta Pisarati (A.D. 1550-1621)

Cr. ed. with auto-com., Intro. and App., by K.V. Sarma,
Hoshiarpur, 1974.


--- Page 283 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY : PRIMARY SOURCES 209

Suryaprajrapti (c. 300 B.C.)
1. Ed. with com. of Malayagiri, Agamodaya Samiti, N.S. Press,
Bombay, 1919.

2. Ed. with Tr. in Hindi, by Amolakarisi, Hyderabad, Virasarnvat
2446.

Strya-siddhanta (bet. A.D. 650-950)
1. Ed. with com. Gadharthaprakasika of Ranganatha, ed. by
Jivananda Bhattacharya, Calcutta, 1891.

2. Ed. with the com. Viyarana of Paramegvara, and Cr. Intro., by
K.S. Shukia, Lucknow Univ., 1957.

3. Ed, with his own com. Sudhayarsini by Sudhakara Dvivedi,
Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal, Calcutta, Second edn., 1925.

4. Edited with the com. of Madhava Purohit and his own Hindi
Tr. by G.P. Dvivedi, N.K. Press, 1904.

5. Ed. with his own com. entitled Tattvamrta by Kapilegvara
Chaudhary, Benares, 1946.

6. Ed. with own com. in Skt. entitled Sudhatarangini, by Sita
Ram Jha, Benares, 1942.

7. Ed. with Hindi translation and detailed notes entitled Vijnana-
bhasya, by Mahavir Prasad Srivastava, Vijnana Parisad,
Allahabad, 1924-41.

8. Tr. with Notes by E. Burgess and W.D. Whitney, J Am. Or.
Soc., 6 (1859-60) 141-498; Sep. rep. of above, Johnson Reprint,
New York, 1964; Rep. ed. with Intro., by P.C. Sengupta,
Calcutta Univ., 1935.
9. English Translation of Surya-siddhanta by Bapu Deva Sastri,
. Calcutta 1861.
10. Ed. with com. (in Mal.) by P.S. Purushottaman Namputiri,
Trivandrum, 1950.
Tantrasangraha of Nilakantha Somayaji (A.D. 1444-1545)
1. Ed. with the com. Laghuvivyti of Saikara Variyar, Trivandrum,
1958, (TSS, No. 188).
2. Text with detailed exposition of the rationale in verse, Cr. ed.
with Intro. and Appendices by K.V. Sarma, Hoshiarpur, 1977.

Tattvarthadhigama-sutra-bhasya of Umasvati (1st. cen. A.D ; Digam-
baras, A.D. 135-219)
Ed. with the author’s own. com., by Keéavial, Caleutta, 1902.

A. Bh, 27


--- Page 284 ---
210. APPENDIX Iv

Tiloya-pannatti (Triloka-prajiiapti) of Yati Vrsabha (bet. A.D. 473-609)
Ed. by A.N. Upadhye and H.L. Jain, Jaina Samraksaka
Sangha, Sholapur, 1943.

Trifoka-sara of Nemicandra (10th cen. A.D.)

1. With Skt. com. of Madhava-candra Traividyadeva, ed. by
Manoharlal Sastri, Bombay, 1918.
2. Edited with Hindi tr. and notes of Visuddhamati Mataji, by

R.C. Mukhtar and C.P. Patni, Sri Mahaviraji (Rajasthan),
1974,

Trisatika of Sridhara (c. A.D. 900)
1. Ed. by Sudhakara Dvivedi, Benares, 1899.

2, (Eng. Tr.) : ‘The Trisatika of Sridharacdrya’, by N. Ramanuja-
charia and G. R. Kaye, Bibliotheca Mathematica, 13 (1912)
203-17.

V akyakarana, ascribed to Vararuci (c. A.D. 1300)
Cr. ed. with com. Laghuprakasika of Sundararaja, with Intro.
and App., by T.S. Kuppanna Sastri and K.V. Sarma, K.S.R.
Inst., Madras-4, 1962.

Vatesvarasiddhanta of Vatesvara (A.D. 904)
|. Ed. with modern Skt. and Hindi coms. by R.S. Sharma and
Mukund Mishra, Pt. I, New Delhi, 1962.
2. Ed. with Tr., Intro., Notes and Comments, by K.S. Shukla,
Ms.

Vedanga-Jyautisa of Lagadha
1. Yajusa-jyotisa with the Bhasya of Somakara Sega and Sudha-
kara Dvivedi, and Arcajyotisa with the Bhdsya of Sudhakara
Dvivedi and: Muralidhara Jha’s expl. notes, Bombay, 1908.
2. Ed. with Tr. and his own Skt. com., by R. Shamasastry,
Mysore, 1936.
3. Ed. with Intro. and Bengali Tr. and Com. by Sitesh Chandra
Bhattacharya, Our Heritage, 19. ii (Suly-Dec. 1971) ff.
Veqvaroha of Madhava of Satgamagrama (A.D. 1360-1425)
Cr. ed. with the com. of Acyuta (in Mal.) with Intro., by K.V.
Sarma, Sanskrit College, Trippunithura, 1956.
Visva-prahelika of Muni Mahendra Kumar II
Bombay, 1969.
Yuktibhasa (Mal.) of Jyesthadeva
Ed. with Notes by Rama Varma (Maru), Thampuran and A.R.
Akhile$vara Iyer, Managalodayam, Trichur, Pt. I, 1949,


--- Page 285 ---
B. Secondary Sources

. Angreji, Pramod : ‘Some sayings of Aryabhata examined against modern
astronomical data’, Paper presented at the Seminar on Aryabhata,
’ INSA, New Delhi, Nov. 1976.

Ansari, S.M. Razaullah : ‘A comparative study of the mathematics of
Aryabhata and Al-khwarizmi’, Paper presented at the Seminar
on Aryabhata, INSA, New Delhi, Nov. 1976.

Ayyangar, A.A. Krishnaswami : () ‘The Hindu sine table’, JIMS, 15
(1923-24) 121-26.
(2) ‘The mathematics of Aryabhata’, OJMS, 16 (1925) 158-79.

Bag, A.K.: (1) ‘Sine table in ancient India’, TJS, 4 (1969) 79-85,

(2) ‘Aryabhata’s method of integral solution of indeterminate
equations of the type by=ax +c’, Paper read at the Segundo
Congreso Argenteno de Hist. de la Causa, Buenos Aires, 1972,

(3) ‘Aryabhata as he was known to later scholars’, Paper
presented at the Seminar on Aryabhata, INSA, New Delhi, Nov.

1976,
Ball, R.S.: A treatise on spherical astronomy, Cambridge, 1923.

Bentley, J.: Historical yiew of the Hindu astronomy, Calcutta, 1823,
pp. 113-17.

Bhandarkar, A.S. : ‘Miscellaneous notes 11 : The decimal notation’,
JBBRAS, 29 (1954) 64-95,

Bhau Daji: ‘On the age and authenticity of the works of Aryabhata,
Varahamihira and Brahmagupta’, JASGBI, (NS), 1 (1865)
392-418,

Billard, Roger: (1) L'Astronomie Indienne, Paris, 1971.

(2) ‘Aryabhata and Indian astronomy’, Paper presented at the
Seminar on Aryabhata, INSA, New Delhi, Nov. 1976.

Bose, D.M., etc. (Edrs.) : A concise history of science in India, INSA,
New Delhi, 1971, pp. 92-94. .

Boyer, C.B.: A history of mathematics, New York, 1968, pp. 232-34,
Brennand, W.: Hindu astronomy, London, 1896.

2u1


--- Page 286 ---
212 APPENDIX IV

Cajori, F.: History of mathematics, 2nd revised and enlarged edition,
New York, 1958, pp. 85-87,.89, 92, 94-96.

Chakrabarty, Gurugovinda : ‘On the Hindu treatment of fractions’,
JDLICU, 24 (1934) 59-76.

Chatterjee, Bina: (1) ‘Geometrical interpretation of the motion of
the Sun, Moon and the five planets as found in the Mathe-
matical-Syntaxis of Ptolemy and in the Hindu astronomical
works’, JASB, 15 (1949) 47-87. Also see Khanda-khadyaka,
Pt. I, Appendix VII, 222-95. See also JASB. Yearbook, 1949,
227-8.

(2) ‘Greek table of chords and Indian table of sines’, Khanda- -
khadyaka, Part I, Appendix VI, 176-221.

(3) ‘A glimpse of Aryabhata’s theory of rotation of Earth’,
IJHS, 9 (1974) 51-55.

Colebrooke, H.T. : (1) ‘Aryabhatta’s doctrine : Age of Aryabhatta’,
. Miscellaneous Essays, Il (1837) 467-77.

(2) Miscellaneous Essays, Vols. 1 and I.

3) Algebra with Arithmetic and Mensuration from the Sanskrit
of Brahmegupta and Bhascara, London, 1817.

Cunningham, A.: Ancient geography of India, ed. with introduction
and notes by Surendranath Majumdar Sastri, Calcutta, 1924.
Das, S.R. (Sukumar Ranjan): (1) ‘Motion of the earth as conceived
by the ancient Indian astronomers’, BCMS, 17 (1926) 173-82.
(2) ‘The origin and development of numerals’, JHQ, 3 (1927)
1-44,
(3) ‘Parallax in Hindu astronomy’, BCMS, 19 (1928) 29-42.

(4) ‘Precession and libration of the equinoxes in Hindu astro-
nomy’, J ASB, (NS), 23 (1927) 403-13.
_ (5) ‘Lunar and solar eclipses in Hindu astronomy’, JASB (NS),

24 (1928) 437-54.
(6) ‘Alleged Greek influence on Hindu astronomy’, JHQ, 4
(1928) 68-77. ,
(7) ‘Astronomical instruments of the Hindus; Cosmological
theories of the Hindu astronomers ; Hindu Calendar,’ Jsis, 15
(1931).
(8) ‘A short chronology of Indian astronomy’, 7HQ, 7 (1931)
137-49.

Datta, B. (Bibhutibhusan): (1) ‘Two Aryabhatas of Albirani’, BCMS,


--- Page 287 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY ; SECONDARY SOURCES , 213

(2) ‘Early evidence of the use of the zero in India’, AMM, 33
(1926) 449-54.

(3) ‘Hindu value of x’, JASB, 22 (1926) 25-42,

(4) ‘Aryabhata, the author of the Ganita’, BCMS, 18 (1927)
5-18,

(5) ‘Early history of the arithmetic of zero and infinity in India,’
BCMS, 18 (1927) 165-76.

(6) ‘Elder Aryabhata’s rule for the solution of indeterminate
equations of the first degree,” BCMS, 24 (1932) 19-36,

(7) ‘Acirya Aryabhata and his followers,’ Sahitya Parishat
Patrika, Calcutta, 40. iii (Banga 1340) 129-58.

(8) ‘Aryabhata and the theory of the motion of the earth’,
Sahitya Parishat Patrika, Calcutta, 42. iii-iv (Banga 1342)
167-83.

Datta, B., and Singh, A.N.: History of Hindu mathematics + Pt. 1,
Numeral notation and Arithmetic ; Pt. 2, Algebra, Lahore, 1935,
1938 ; Rep., in one vol., Asia Pub. House, Bombay, 1962; Pt. III
in Ms. form. Hindi tr. of Pt. I, Hindi Samiti, Lucknow, 1963.

Dey, N.L.: Geographical dictionary of ancient and mediaeval India,
Second edition, London, 1927.

mre

Dhani, S.L. : ‘Manvantara theory of evolution of the solar system and
Aryabhata’, Paper presented at the Seminar on Aryabhata,
INSA, New Delhi, Nov. 1976.

Dikshit, S. B. (Saakara Balakrsna) : Bharatiya Jyotisasastra (in
Marathi), Second edition, Poona, 1931; Bharatiya Jyotisa (in
Hindi), Tr. by S.N. Jharkhandi, Information Department, Uttar
Pradesh, 1963, (Hindi Samiti Series, No. 9) ; Bharatiya-Jyotisa-
Sastra, Tr. in English, by R.V. Vaidya, Pt. I, History of astro-
nomy during the Vedic and Vedanga periods, Director General
of Observatories, New Delhi, 1968.

Dvivedi, Sudhakara : Ganaka-tarangini, Rev. ed. by Padmakara Dvivedi,
Benaras, 1933, pp. 2-7.

‘Elfering, K. : (1) ‘Uber den Flachen-bzw. Rauminhalt von Dreieck und
Pyramide sowie Kreis und Kugel bei Aryabhata TP’, Rechen-
pfennige (Vogel Festchrift), Munich, 1963, pp. 57-67.

(2) ‘The area of a triangle and the volume of a pyramid as
well as the area of a circle and the surface of the hemisphere in


--- Page 288 ---
214 — APPENDIX 1V

the mathematics of Aryabhata I’, Paper presented at the Seminar
on Aryabhata, INSA, New Delhi, Nov. 1976.

Farrington, Benjamin: Greek science, vol. 1 (Thales to Aristotle) ;
vol. 2 (Theophastus to Galen), Pelican Books, 1949.

Fleet, J. F.: (1) ‘Aryabhata’s system of expressing numbers’, JASGBI,
43 (1911), 109-26.
(2). ‘Some Hindu values of the dimensions of the earth’,
JASGBI, 1912, 463-70.

(3) ‘Tables for finding the mean place of Saturn’, JASGBI, 1915,
TAl.

Forbes, Eric C.: ‘Mesopotamian and Greek influences on Ancient
Indian astronomy and on the work of Aryabhata’, Paper
presented at the Seminar on Aryabhata, INSA, New Delhi,
Nov. 1976.

Ganguly, $.K, (Saradakanta) : (1) ‘Was Aryabhata indebted to the
Greeks for his alphabetic system of expressing numbers ?,
BCMS, 17 (1926) 195-202.

(2) ‘Notes on Aryabhata', JBORS, 12 (1926) 78-91.

(3) ‘The elder Aryabhata and the modern arithmetical notation’,
AMM, 34 (1927) 409-15.

(4) ‘The source of the Indian solution of the so-called Pellian
equation’, BCMS, 19 (1928) 151-76.

(5) ‘The elder Aryabhata’s value of =’, AMM, 37 (1930) 16-22.

Gode, P.K. : ‘Notes on Indian chronology—Appaya diksita’s criticism
of Aryabhata’s theory. of the diurnal motion of the earth’,
ABORT, 19 (1939) 93-95.

Gupta, R.C. (Radha Charan): (1) ‘Fractional parts of Aryabhata’s
sines and certain rules found in Govindasvami’s Bhasya on the
Maha-Bhaskariya’, IJ HS, 6 (1971) 51-59.

(2) ‘Aryabhata’s value of x’, Math. Edn.,7 (1973), Sec. B,
pp. 17-20.

(3) ‘A height and distance problem from the Aryabhatiyae’,
Math. Edn., 8 (1974), Sec. B, pp. 71-75.

(4) ‘A preliminary bibliography on Aryabhatal’, Math, Edn.,
10 (1976), Sec. B, 21-26.


--- Page 289 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY : SECONDARY SOURCES 215

(5) ‘On some mathematical rules from the Aryabhatiya’, Paper
presented at the Seminar on Aryabhata, INSA, New Delhi,
Nov. 1976.

Gurjar, L.V.: Ancient Indian mathematics and Vedha, Ideal Book
Service, Poona, 1947, pp. 79-90.

Hall, F.E.: ‘On the Aryasiddhanta’ JAOS, 6 (1860) 556-59,
Jaggi, O.P.: (1) Scientists of Ancient India, Atma Ram and sons,
Delhi, 1966, pp. 151-57.

(2) ‘Scientific attitude around the time of Aryabhata’, Paper

presented at the Seminar on Aryabhata, INSA, New Delhi,
Nov. 1976, ,

Jain, L.C.: (1) ‘Aryabhata, the astronomer and Yativrsabha, the
cosmographer’, Tirthankar, 1 (1975) 102-106,
(2) ‘Aryabhata-I and Yativrsabha—A study in Kalpa and -Meru’,
Paper presented at the Seminar on Aryabhata, INSA, New Delhi,
Nov. 1976.

Jha, P.: (1) Aryabhata I : His contribution to mathematics, Ph.D.
thesis, Bihar Univ., 1970, (Unpublished).
(2) ‘AryabhataI: His school’, JBRS, 55 (1969) 102-14.
(3) ‘AryabhataI: Some of his lost works’, JBRS, 58 (1972)
188-96.

(4) ‘Aryabhata I and the value of nm’, contributed to the
Symposium on Hist. of Math., New Delhi, 1975.
(5) ‘Aryabhata prathama : Bharatiya ganita ka mahan pravar-
taka’ (in Hindi), Pracyaprabha, 1971.

Kaye, G.R. : (1) ‘Notes on Indian mathematics, No. 2: Aryabhata’,
JASB, (NS), 4 (1908) 111-41.
(2) ‘The two Aryabhatas’, 5M, 10 (1909-10) 289-92.

. (3) ‘Ancient Hindu spherical astronomy’, JASB, (NS), 15 (1919)

153-89.

Kern, H.: ‘On some fragments of Aryabhata’, JASGBI, 20 (1863)
371-87. +

Ketkar, V.R. : Ketaki-grahaganita, ed. with Skt. com. entitled Ketaki-
Parimala by D.V. Ketkar, Poona, 1930.

Khan, M.S.: ‘The Arabic writers’ knowledge of Aryabhata’s works’,

, Paper presented at the Seminar on Aryabhata, INSA, New
Delhi, Nov, 1976.


--- Page 290 ---
216—Ct APPENDIX 1V
Lahiri, N.C. : ‘The length of the year in Hindu astronomy’, IC, 8 (1941)
114-16.

Levin, G.M. Bongard: Aryabhata and Lokayatas’, Paper presented at
the Seminar on Aryabhata, INSA, New Delhi, Nov. 1976.

Mazumdar, N.K. : ‘Aryabhata’s rule in relation to indeterminate
equations of the first degree’, BCMS, 3 (1911-12) 11-19.

Midonick, H. (Edr.) : The Treasury of mathematics, Penguin Books,
vol. I, 1968, pp. 219-26.

Mishra, B.: ‘Aryabhata ka paricaya’ (in Hindi), Studies in History,
Allahabad, vol. I, 1967, Hindi Sn., pp. 7-14.

Mohan, Brij: History of mathematics, (in Hindi), Lucknow, 1965, pp.
69-75, 169-74, 270-74, 326-27.

Muller, C.: ‘Volumen und Oberflache der Kugel bei Aryabhata’,
Deutsche Mathematic Jg., 5 (1940) 244-55.

Nambiar, K. Damodaran: (1) ‘Aryabhata (Bhatta) P, All-India Or.
Conf., 22nd Session, Gauhati, 1965, Sum. of Papers, 197-99.
(2) ‘Aryabhatan’ (in Malayalam), Mathrubhami (Weekly,
Kozhikode, Kerala), Oct. 18, 1970, 15-16, 41.

Naraharayya, S.N.: ‘Notes on the Hindu tables of sines’, JIMS, 15
(1923-24) 105-13.

Needham, J.: Science and civilization in China, vols.1 to 4, Cam-
bridge University Press, 1954-63 ; see esp. Vol. 3, pp. 34 (a), 88,
102, 108, 122, 147, 149.

Neugebauer, O.: (1) Exact sciences in antiquity, Brown University
Press, Second edn., 1957.

(2) The astronomical tables of al-Khwarizmi, Kopenhagen, 1962.
(3) A history of ancient mathematical astronomy.

Pillai, T. Ramalingam : Aryabhata or the Newton of Indian astronomy,
Madras, 1905,

Pingree, David: (1) ‘Aryabhata I’, Dictionary of Scientific Biography,
Vol. I, New York, 1970, pp. 308-309.
(2) Census of Exact Sciences in Sanskrit, Am. Phil. Soc.,

Philadelphia, Series A, Vol. 1, 1970, pp. 50-53, Vol. 2, 1971,
p. 15, Vol. 3, 1976.


--- Page 291 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY : SECONDARY SOURCES 217

Prakash, Satya: Founders of sciences in ancient India, Res. Inst. of
Ancient Scientific Studies, New Delhi-14, 1965, pp. 419-49.

Prasad, B.N. and R. Shukla : ‘Aryabhata of Kusumapura’, Bull.
Allahabad Uniy. Assn., 15 (1950-51) 24-32.

Prasad, G.: History of Indian astronomy (in Hindi), Publication
Bureau, U.P., Lucknow, 1956, pp. 79-92.

Raghavan, V.: New catalogus catalogorum, Univ. of, Madras, vol. II,
1966, pp. 170-72. ~

Rai, R.N. : (1) ‘The ardharatrika-tantra of Aryabhata’, IJ HS, 6 (1971)
147-32.

(2) ‘Aryabhata, the man and his'works’, The Hindustan Times
Magazine (Sunday edn.), Oct. 31, 1976, p. 11.

Ram Behari : ‘Aryabhata as a mathematican’, Paper presented at the
Seminar on Aryabhata, INSA, New Delhi, Nov. 1976.

Rodet, L.: (1). ‘Sur ja veritable signification de la notation numérique
inventée par Aryabhata’, JA, ser. 7, vol. 16 (1880) 440-85.
(2) ‘L’ Algébra d’al-Kharizmi et les methodes Indiennes et
Grecques’, JA, ser. 7, vol. 11 (1878) 5-98.
‘Russell, H.N., Dugan, R.S. and Stewart, J.Q.: Astronomy, Rev. edn.,
' Ginn and company, Boston.
Sachau, E.: : Alberuni’s India, 2 vols., London, 1910.

Saraswathi, T.A.: ‘Sredhaksetras or diagrammatical representations
of Mathematical Series’, JORM, 28 (1958-59) 74-85,

Sarkar, Y.: The elements of plane geometry in 48 propositions from
the Sanskrit text of Arya Bhata, Calcutta, 1878.

Sarma, K.V. : (1) 4 history of the Kerala School of. Hindu astronomy,
Vishveshvaranand Inst., Hoshiarpur, 1972, (V.I. Series, No. 55).

(2) ‘Tradition of. Aryabhatiya in Kerala : Revision of planetary
parameters’, Paper presented at the Seminar on Aryabhata,
INSA, New. Delhi, Nov. 1976.

(3) ‘Gargya-Kerala Nilakantha Somayajin, the Bhasyakara of
the Aryabhatiya’, JORM, 26 (1956-57) 24-39,

A.Bh. 28


--- Page 292 ---
218 APPENDIX IV

(4) ‘Gleanings from Bhaskara I’s Bhasya on the Aryabhatiya’,
21st All-India Oriental Conference, Srinagar, Summaries of
Papers, p. 203.

Sarton, George : Introduction to history of science, Baltimore, Reprint,
1950, vol. I, pp. 387, 400, 401, 409, 428, 475.

Sastry, T-S. Kuppanna: ‘The School of Aryabhata and the peculia-
tities thereof, JJ HS, 4 (1969) 126-34.

Sen, S.N.: (1) ‘Aryabhata’s mathematics’, BNISI, No. 21, (1963)
297-319.
(2) A Bibliography of Sanskrit works on astronomy and mathema-
tics, Part 1: Manuscripts, texts, translations and studies; _
National Institute of Sciences of India, New Delhi, 1966, pp. 7-10.

Sengupta, P.C.: (1) ‘Aryabhata’s lost work’, BCMS, 22 (1930) 115-20.
(2) ‘Hindu luni-solar astronomy’, BCMS, 24 (1932) 32ff.
(3) ‘Aryabhata’s method of determining the mean motion of
planets’, BCMS 12 (1920-21) 183-88.
(4) ‘Aryabhata, the father of Indian epicyclic astronomy’,
BCMS, 18 (1929), pp. 1-56.
(5) ‘Greek and Hindu methods in Spherical astronomy’, JDL]
CU, 21 (1931) 22 ff.

Sewell, R. : (1) ‘The first Arya-siddhanta’, Ep. Ind., 16 (1921-22) 100ff.
(2) ‘The first. Arya-siddhanta : Mean. motion’, Ep. Ind., 17
(1923-24) 17H.

Sharma, M.L. : ‘State of Indian astronomy at the time of Aryabhata’,
Paper presented at the Aryabhata Seminar, INSA, New Delhi,
Nov. 1976.

Shukla, K.S.: (1) ‘Aryabhata I’s astronomy with midnight day-
_yeckoning’, Ganita, 18. i (June 1967) 83-105 ; Hindi version in
C.B. Gupta Abhinandan Grantha, New Delhi, 166, pp. 483-94.
(2) ‘Early Hindu methods in spherical astronomy, Ganita’, 19, ii
(1968) 49-72.
(3) ‘Hindu mathematics in the seventh century as found in
Bhaskara 1’s commentary on the Aryabhatiya’, Ganita, 22.i (June
1971) 115-30 ; 22.ii (Dec. 1971) 61-78 ; 23.i (June 1972) 57-79 ;
23.ii (Dec. 1972) 41-50.
(4) ‘Use of hypotenuse in the computation of the equation of the
centre under the epicyclic theory in the School of Aryabhata I’,
IJHS, 8 (1973).


--- Page 293 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY : SECONDARY SOURCES : 219

(5) ‘Aryabhata I : His methods and observations’, Paper
presented at the Seminar on Aryabhata, INSA, New Delhi, Nov.
1976.

(6) ‘Glimpses from the Aryabhata-siddhanta’, Paper presented
at the Aryabhata Seminar, INSA, New Delhi, Nov. 1976.

(7) Aryabhata : Indian mathematician and astronomer (Sth:
cent. A.D.), INSA, New Delhi, 1976.

Smart, W.M.: Text-book on spherical astronomy, Cambridge, 1940.

Smith, David Eugene: History of mathematics, 2 vols., Dover
Publication, New York, 1958: I, pp. 153-56; II, pp. 379, 387,
444, 608, 615, 627.

Srinivasiengar, C.N.: The history of ancient Indian mathematics,
World Press, Calcutta, 1967, pp. 40-54.

Taliaferro, R. Catesby : Translation of Ptolemy’s Almagest, Published
in Great Books of the Western World, vol. 16, University of
Chicago, 1952.

Thibaut, G. : Astronomie, Astrologie und Mathematik, Strassburg, 1899,
pp. 54-55,

Thiruvenkatacharya, V.: The antiquity of Hindu astronomy and the
Tamils, Madras, 1970, pp. 21-22.

Volodarsky, Alexander 1. : ‘Aryabhata and the creation of decimal -
place-value notation’, Paper presented at the Aryabhata Seminar,
INSA, New Delhi, Nov. 1976.

Watters, T.: On Huan Chwang’s travels in India, ed. by T.W. Rhys
Davids and S.W. Bashall, vol. 2, London, 1905.

Whish, C.M.: ‘De la notation alphabetique des Indians’, JA, ser. 2,
vol. 16 (1835) 116-30.

Whitney, W.D. : ‘Additional note on Aryabhata and his writings’,
JAOS, 6 (1860) 560-64.

Winternitz, M.: Geschichte der indischen Litterateur, tome 3, Leipzig,
1922, pp. 562-63, 573.

Yano, M.: ‘Aryabhata’s method of expressing numbers,’ JZBS, 19
(1970) 434-38.
